ACC 03150:

Introduction to Business and Analytics for Financial Information

In this course students will be introduced to business data analytics and use software tools, such as Microsoft Excel, to
analyze data to support business decision making.

END

Accounting Mentorship

ACC 03200:

The Accounting Mentorship Program links College of Business students who are interested in an accounting career with
working professionals in the field of accounting. Students enrolling in this course are matched with a mentor who is
presently working in an area of accounting in which the student expresses an interest, (such as public, corporate, tax,
government, or forensic accounting). Students and mentors communicate via email, phone and in-person meetings, in order
for students to obtain a better understanding of the challenges and rewards of accounting as a profession from those
presently working as accounting practitioners. This enhanced understanding should help solidify the choice of profession
and allow students to begin developing professional networking skills.

END

ACC 03210:

This course includes accounting theory and practice in the analysis of business transactions and the recording of business
data; complete accounting cycle; interpretation of financial data for sole proprietorships, partnerships, and corporations.

Principles of Accounting I

END

Principles of Accounting II

ACC 03211:

Prerequisites: ACC 03210

This course includes accounting theory and practice applied to corporations; budgeting and estimating; analysis and
comparison of cost and financial data.

END

Supervised Internship in Accounting

ACC 03300:

Prerequisites: ACC 03310

This course provides accounting field experience in government, industry or non-profit organizations. Interns are given
assignments that prepare them for productive employment upon graduation. The learning process is monitored by an
accounting faculty member.

END

Accounting Analytics

ACC 03301:

Prerequisites: STAT 02260 and ACC 03211 and (STAT 02265 or STAT 02261) (MATH 03125 or MATH 01130 or MATH 01140)

This course provides an introduction to accounting analytics. Accounting data will be identified, described, extracted,
transformed, and manipulated using analytical, visualization, and data storage/management technologies to solve business
problems. Students will employ ETL, (extract, transform, and load), descriptive, predictive, and exploratory analytical and
visualization techniques.

END

ACC 03310:

Intermediate Accounting I

Prerequisites: ACC 03210 and ACC 03211 minimum grade of C in both courses

This course includes a review of the accounting process, the preparation of each of the financial statements - i.e.,
Statement of Financial Position, Statement of Income, Statement of Changes in Owner's Equity, and Statement of Cash
Flows - and the specific principles related to the accounting for current assets, current liabilities and long-term liabilities. A
special section is devoted to the time value of money as related to accounting.

END

Intermediate Accounting II

ACC 03311:

Prerequisites: ACC 03310 minimum grade of C-

This course includes the accounting principles related to investments, operating assets, current and long-term liabilities
and owner's equity accounts. In addition, special topics cover accounting for leases, pensions and current value accounting.

END

Concepts in Federal Taxation

ACC 03316:

Prerequisites: ACC 03310 and 57 Credits Required

This course presents an overview of the Federal Tax System in a conceptual framework with emphasis on transactions
common to all entities. It exposes students to taxation and its interrelationship between individuals, corporations,
partnerships and other business entities. Students will review recent tax legislation and will gain experience in research and
preparation of tax returns in a manual and computerized environment.

END

Accounting Information Systems

ACC 03320:

Prerequisites: ACC 03310 and (MIS 02234 or MIS 02210)

The course is designed to give the accounting student an introduction to the concepts and tools related to the use,
development, and adaptation of computer-based accounting information systems. The course will emphasize information
system analysis and design, internal controls, and technology of accounting systems. Students will gain hands-on experience
with a commercial accounting software system throughout the course.

END

Strategic Cost Analysis

ACC 03326:

Prerequisites: ACC 03210 and ACC 03211 minimum grade of C in both courses

This course deals with techniques and systems used for internal control. It views the cost accounting system as the
connecting link between planning and control functions of management. Topics include cost accumulation procedures; job
order and process cost accounting cycles, variance analysis, master and flexible budgets, cost-volume-profit analysis, and
transfer pricing.

END

Entrepreneurial Accounting

ACC 03328:

Prerequisites: FIN 04300

This course provides students with the accounting and financial tools essential for effective decision making in starting and
managing small to mid-sized businesses. It focuses on the measurement and evaluation of financial performance, effective
cash management techniques, internal control concepts, good decision making for growth and long-term solvency of the
business. A hands-on, project-based learning experience is emphasized to integrate the various financial tools and to assist
students in applying what they learn.

END

Selected Topics in Accounting

ACC 03330:

Prerequisites: ACC 03310

In this course students will investigate new areas and developments in theory, research, and the practice of accounting.
Specialized topics will vary each semester. The topics will be determined by the department and the instructor teaching the
course. Course activities include in-depth study of selected topics, case analysis, and research.

END

Foundations of Accounting

ACC 03405:

This course presents an overview of accounting as an information system useful for decision making. It provides students
with an understanding of the basic concepts of financial and managerial accounting from the perspective of a future user of
accounting information.

END

Auditing

ACC 03410:

Prerequisites: ACC 03310 minimum grade of C- and STAT 02261 or STAT 02265

This course introduces students to the basic concepts underlying audit and assurance services and demonstrates how to
apply the concepts to these services. It studies the framework of an audit which includes pre-planning, planning, evidence
gathering, considering and/or auditing internal controls, performing various audit tests, audit completion, and rendering
audit opinions via audit reports, and the use of statistics and audit software in the auditing process. This course also includes
the application of auditing principles and procedures through the use of audit software.

END

Advanced Auditing and Analytics

ACC 03411:

Prerequisites: ACC 03410

This course builds on the knowledge base from Auditing (ACC 03410), to provide students with an in-depth understanding
of the auditor's legal liability, the profession's regulatory environment, the audit process using advanced auditing techniques,
the auditor's role in ensuring that publicly issued financial statements are fairly presented, and analyzing data to determine
the reasonableness of financial information. The course will cover advanced topics concerning complex auditor judgments,
data analysis, and the use of audit software tools for sampling and audit procedures.

END

Advanced Accounting

ACC 03416:

Prerequisites: ACC 03311 minimum grade of C-

This course covers concepts and accounting for business combinations, and specialized financial statement disclosures. It
also covers the accounting for inter-company transfers, segment reporting, and interim reporting. It provides an overall
review of generally accepted accounting principles in producing consolidated financial statements for the business and
non-business organization.

END

Forensic Accounting and Fraud Investigation

ACC 03419:

Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in both ACC 03210 and ACC 03211

This course provides an introduction to forensic accounting and fraud investigation. It examines the major causes of fraud
and white-collar crime and methods to detect and prevent fraud. Tools and systems used in detecting fraud will be discussed.
A key component of the course will allow students to understand the ethical and professional responsibility of the
accounting profession as it relates to financial reporting. The course provides students exposure to case study, analytics and
critical thinking in order to confirm that financial information is presented fairly.

END

International Accounting

ACC 03425:

Prerequisites: ACC 03311 minimum grade of C-

This course provides students with exposure to the critical role of foreign and international business perspectives and
enables students to understand and compare the two most commonly applied accounting standards in the world, U.S.
GAAP and IFRS. Topics covered will include IFRS, foreign currency transaction, analysis of foreign financial statements,
international taxation, and transfer pricing.

END

Integrative Accounting Seminar

ACC 03428:

Prerequisites: ACC 03311 minimum grade of C- or ACC 02311

This course provides an integrative experience in which students synthesize knowledge from the accounting content areas
to interpret, evaluate, and analyze financial information in order to enhance planning and decision making. The course uses
case analyses to involve students in active rather than passive learning, and places emphasis on skills in analytical and critical
thinking, technology, communication, and teamwork.

END

Individual Taxation

ACC 03430:

Prerequisites: ACC 03310 with a minimum grade of C-.

This course surveys the tax structure of the United States, emphasizing the Internal Revenue code and regulations that
affect federal income tax liabilities of individuals. Basic tax research and preparation skills are a consistent theme
throughout the course.

END

Taxation of Business Entities

ACC 03431:

Prerequisites: ACC 03430 or ACC 03432 or ACC 03316

This is an introductory course in the federal income taxation of business transactions relating to corporations,
partnerships, LLCs, and estates and trusts. Students will explore tax policy issues, apply basic tax research to specific case
problems, prepare common IRS forms and schedules, and develop skills necessary for effective tax planning and its impact
on business decisions.

END

Federal Taxation

ACC 03432:

Prerequisites: ACC 03310

This course introduces the principles of federal income taxation as it relates to business transactions and decision making.
Primary emphasis is on individual taxation with an overview of tax considerations and planning for business entities.

END

Financial and Managerial Accounting

ACC 03500:

This course takes a managerial approach with emphasis on decision making. It includes financial statement analysis and
topics on determination of cost behavior using regression analysis and learning curves, activity-based costing, cost
allocation, performance measurement, and the decision making process.

END

Advanced Managerial Accounting

ACC 03502:

Prerequisites: ACC 03500

This course explores advanced managerial accounting topics, beyond the introductory topics covered in ACC 03500 –
Managerial Accounting, pertaining to the three basic managerial activities – planning, controlling and decision making.
Several of these topics are further explored through case study analysis and discussion. The course also utilizes data analytics
tools to better prepare students for challenges they face in the professional world.

END

Government and Not-For-Profit Accounting

ACC 03507:

Prerequisites: ACC 03500

This financial accounting course focuses on the contemporary accounting issues of governmental and non-profit
organizations. It includes financial reporting, budgeting, forecasting and strategic planning in the environments of local,
state, and federal government, colleges and universities, hospitals, and voluntary health and welfare organizations.

END

Intermediate Financial Accounting

ACC 03509:

This course will include a review of the accounting process, the conceptual framework, the preparation of financial
statements and specific principles related to the accounting for current assets, property, plant and equipment, liabilities,
leases, income taxes, pensions, and shareholders' equity. Research and empirical evidence will be emphasized. This course is
restricted to students who have not taken Intermediate Accounting I and II at the undergraduate level.

END

Financial Statement Analysis

ACC 03510:

This course will take an expanded study of financial statement analysis from the point of view of the primary users of
financial statements: equity and credit analysts. The analysis and use of financial statements will also emphasize the
properties of numbers derived from these statements, business and asset valuation, and the importance and use of the notes
to the financial statements. Expanded data analytic skills will be emphasized.

END

Law for Accountants

ACC 98300:

Prerequisites: MGT 98242

This course includes the study of the legal aspects of sales, liability, secured transactions, commercial paper and consumer
credit.

END

How to Succeed in Business School

BUS 01100:

This course is designed to help students adjust to college, provides information needed to be a successful business student,
and introduces students to their chosen program of study. Focus will be on an overview of the Rohrer College of Business,
introduction to a culture of professionalism, time management and successful academic skills, overview of major/career
exploration, and engagement in Rowan and the business community.

END

BUS 01488:

This course will provide students with multifaceted experiences in career planning and development. Students will engage
in self-assessment, career exploration, job search strategies and decision making.

Career Planning and Development

END

Principles of Finance

FIN 04300:

Prerequisites: ACC 03211 (may be taken concurrently) and STAT 02260 minimum grade of C- and (MATH 03125 or MATH 01130 or
MATH 01140 minimum grade of C-) and ECON 04101 and ECON 04102

This course includes the following topics: financial goals; depreciation, taxation and cashflows; financing the firm via
short-term, intermediate, and long-term debt, and preferred and common stock; capital budgeting and leasing; dividend
policy; and business growth and contraction.

END

FIN 04310:

Financial Analytics

Prerequisites: STAT 02261 or STAT 02265

This course provides an introduction to financial analytics. Students in this course will conceptualize, build, and interpret
machine learning models relating to finance. Specifically, students will employ ETL (extract, transform, and load),
descriptive, predictive, and exploratory analytical and visualization techniques to explore, understand, describe, and predict
financial data/performance.

END

Selected Topics in Finance

FIN 04327:

Prerequisites: FIN 04300 minimum grade of C

In this course students will investigate new areas and developments in theory, research, and practice in finance. Specialized
topics will vary each semester. The topics will be determined by the department and the instructor teaching the course.
Course activities include in-depth study of selected topics, case analysis, and research.

END

Selected Topics in Finance II

FIN 04328:

Prerequisites: FIN 04300 minimum grade of C

In this course students will investigate new areas and developments in theory, research, and practice in finance. Specialized
topics will vary each semester. The topics will be determined by the department and the instructor teaching the course.
Course activities include in-depth study of selected topics, case analysis, and research.

END

Finance Internship

FIN 04330:

Prerequisites: FIN 04300

This course provides field experience in the finance discipline which includes commercial banking, investment banking,
brokerage houses, corporations, government, and not-for-profit organizations. Interns are given assignments that prepare
them for productive employment upon graduation. The learning process is monitored by a finance faculty member.

END

Personal Financial Planning

FIN 04350:

Prerequisites: FIN 04300

This course provides the framework and tools for preparing personal financial plans that serve as road maps for goal
achievement. This course emphasizes the dynamics of the personal financial planning process by considering the impact of
life changes - birth, marriage, divorce, job and career and death. This course will cover a wide variety of money management
topics including budgeting, expenses, debt, saving, retirement, and insurance, among others.

END

Bank Management

FIN 04358:

Prerequisites: FIN 04300

This course discusses the regulations, structure, and operations of commercial banks, which are the largest of all financial
institutions. This course also teaches how these economically vital firms manage different kinds of risks such as credit,
market, liquidity, solvency, currency, operational and legal. This course also studies the international and global
developments in the banking industry.

END

Financial Management I

FIN 04422:

Prerequisites: FIN 04300 minimum grade of C and (STAT 02261 or STAT 02265)

An in-depth study of the selected financial management topics using a case and problem-solving approach. The emphasis is
on corporate asset management and investment decisions. Topics include risk and return analysis, cost of capital, capital
budgeting decision methods, leasing, financial analysis and forecasting, and working capital management.

END

Financial Management II

FIN 04423:

Prerequisites: FIN 04422

An in-depth study of selected financial management topics using a case and problem-solving approach. The emphasis is on
corporate financing decisions. Topics include capital structure decisions, dividend policy, long-term financing, bankruptcy,
reorganization, liquidation, mergers, leveraged buyouts, divestitures, holding companies, and pension plan management.

END

Seminar in Finance

FIN 04424:

Prerequisites: FIN 04300 and STAT 02261

Having learned financial markets, financial management, and investment/portfolio analysis in previous finance courses, in
this course, students will undertake integrative research on these subjects. This course will teach students the skills required
to undertake independent research. They will select a topic, conduct a literature review, and collect and analyze data.

END

Financial Derivatives

FIN 04425:

Prerequisites: FIN 04430 minimum grade of C

This course covers a comprehensive survey of the various financial instruments available in the financial markets followed
by an in-depth study of practical use of the financial instruments in hedging financial risk. Hedging will be performed from
the perspectives of a financial manager and an investor or an investor consultant. Topics include options, futures, swaps, and
other hybrid securities and how these securities are used to hedge the risk in a firm or specific financial transaction.

END

Investments

FIN 04431:

Prerequisites: FIN 04300 minimum grade of C and (STAT 02261 or STAT 02265)

The basic decision-making processes for investment decisions are outlined in this course in terms of investors' needs and
market opportunities, security market operations, security valuation, investment time, government and corporate securities
company analysis and portfolio management.

END

Financial Institutions and Markets

FIN 04433:

Prerequisites: FIN 04300 minimum grade of C

This course provides an overview of financial markets and institutions in the U.S. economy. It intends to equip students
with a balanced introduction to the operations, mechanics, and structure of the U.S. financial system, emphasizing its
institutions, markets, regulators and financial instruments. Another focus of the course is to analyze the major risks faced by
financial institutions and the strategies for controlling and managing these risks.

END

International Financial Management

FIN 04435:

Prerequisites: FIN 04300 minimum grade of C

This course studies financial management in the international environment. Topics include foreign exchange risk
management, multinational working capital management, international portfolio investment, foreign direct investment,
capital budgeting for the multinational corporation, political risk, international financing and international financial
markets.

END

Insurance And Risk Management

FIN 04436:

Prerequisites: FIN 04300 and (STAT 02261 or STAT 02265)

This course is an advanced and elective course for finance majors, and recommended for students who want to pursue
careers in insurance and financial planning industries. The course combines the theoretical underpinnings of risk financing
with practical applications and examples from business and individual perspectives. Topics include risk in our society,
insurance and risk, types of insurers and marketing systems, insurance company operations, financial operations of insurers,
government regulation of insurance, fundamental legal principles, analysis of insurance contracts, life insurance, annuity and
individual retirement accounts, health insurance, employee benefits, home insurance, auto insurance, commercial property
insurance, enterprise risk management, and use of capital market products for risk financing.

END

Portfolio Management

FIN 04438:

Prerequisites: FIN 04431

This course is an advanced and elective course for finance majors and recommended for students who want to pursue
careers in financial planning, asset management or the investment banking industry. The course combines theory of
portfolio management with the practical process and issues encountered when managing money in the real world. Topics
include formulating investment policy, recognizing risk and return characteristics of investment vehicles, developing asset
allocation and security selection strategies using top down fundamental analysis, and evaluating portfolio and manager
performance relative to investment objectives and appropriate benchmarks. Investment tools, such as economic indicators,
statistical analysis, and ratio comparison will be introduced in computer labs.

END

Foundations of Fintech

FIN 04439:

Prerequisites: FIN 04300 with a minimum grade of Cor better

The objective of this course is to introduce students to the multiple areas of application of technology in finance. Topics include 
investing, blockchain/DeFi/smart contracts, crowdfunding, payments, money transfers, InsurTech, borrowing/lending/capital
allocation, political/regulatory frameworks, privacy, risks, societal implications, pitfalls in autonomous finance, choices
under uncertainty, behavioral biases, manipulation, and surveillance.

END

Bitcoin, Cryptocurrency, and Blockchain Applications

FIN 04444:

Prerequisites: FIN 04300 minimum grade of C

The objective of this course is to introduce students to the functionality and applications of bitcoin and other
cryptocurrencies. Topics include basics of cryptography and cryptographic primitives used in distributed cryptocurrency
systems, history of digital money, the design and function of the bitcoin system, anonymity, politics and regulation related
to cryptocurrencies, extensions of the bitcoin system for non-monetary uses, altcoins. In addition, since the cryptocurrency
markets provide free market data feeds, the course will include discussion and practice on building algorithmic trading
systems.

END

Financial Decision Making

FIN 04500:

Prerequisites: (ACC 03500 or ACC 03510) and MBA Foundation Courses

Students in this course will learn valuation techniques including adjusted present value, equity cash flows, and real-option
valuation. In addition to comparing alternative valuation techniques and the assumptions and limitations underlying each,
students will explore the technical difficulties and incentive effects caused by high leverage, the relation between capital
structure and capital costs, the interaction between a firm's financial structure and its business strategies, the conditions
contributing to potential under or over-valuation of a firm's prospects by the market, and the managerial consequences of
such misvaluation.

END

Capital Budgeting

FIN 04512:

Prerequisites: MBA Foundation Course requirements, contact MBA Office for details

This course includes the following topics: estimation of project cash flows, interest, annuity, and present value calculations,
evaluation of projects under conditions of certainty and risk, strategic planning in capital budgeting, and leasing.

END

Issues in Finance

FIN 04516:

Prerequisites: FIN 04500

This course includes the following topics: mergers and acquisitions, financial structure analysis, cost of capital analysis,
capital budgeting, portfolio management, financial institutions, money and capital markets, and international finance.

END

Derivative Securities and Financial Risk Management

FIN 04518:

Prerequisites: FIN 04600

In this course students will learn forward, future, option and swap contracts, and hedging, arbitrage, and derivatives-pricing
models. In addition, securitization and risk management concepts will be covered. Students will learn how to model and
evaluate derivative instruments and their applications to corporate strategy and risk management.

END

Investment Analysis and Portfolio Management

FIN 04600:

Prerequisites: MSF Foundation Courses

In this course students will analyze and develop an ability to deal with the following topics: investment values and market
price with regard to risk, return, portfolio diversification, taxes and inflation. Students will also examine the role of fixed
income securities versus common stock prices, yields, returns and valuations, warrants, options and future contracts, U.S.
and foreign securities markets, and the rapidly developing science of portfolio management as it applies to both the firm and
the individual.

END

Introduction To Africana Studies

AFST 11104:

This course will introduce students to the interdisciplinary, multicultural and international field of Africana Studies, from
the perspective of the experiences and scholarly and creative contributions of Africans and African descendants to the
making of the modern world. The primary focus in the course will be to explore how the experiences and contributions of
African peoples have influenced historical and contemporary developments, addressed urgent societal issues, and helped to
shape social consciousness, social activism and social change, within the African Diaspora and the global community.

END

Africana Social Thought

AFST 11304:

Prerequisites: AFST 11104

This course engages students in an introductory overview of major ideas, theories, ideological debates, and social/political
movements that have emerged in the African Diaspora to challenge national and global social, political, economic and other
realities, and to produce a dynamic framework of historical and contemporary thought that have helped to shape social
consciousness, social activism, and public policy.

END

Research Methods In Africana Studies

AFST 11305:

Prerequisites: AFST 11104 and COMP 01112

This course is designed to develop students skills in applying and critically reviewomg basic quantitative research methods.
Topics will include analysis of descriptive, correlational and experimental studies, followed by an extensive presentation of
the main qualitative research methods, including case studies, ethnographic studies, grounded theory research, life history
studies, phenomenological studies, and participatory action research. Students will also learn data gathering methods such as
observation, interviewing, and analysis of archival materials.

END

Service Learning Seminar In Africana Studies

AFST 11310:

Prerequisites: AFST 11104 and Permission of Instructor is also required

The proposed model for the Africana Studies Major at Rowan University requires that students participate in a
three-credit service learning experience, accumulating 70-75 hours with an educational, social sevice, mental health,
business, or cultural/civic group, institution or organization to explore community or institutional development initiatives
which address issues that are local, regional, national and/or international in scope. The seminar will integrate classroom
learning and community service through a collaborative partnership involving each student, the seminar leader, and a leader
within the community organization. Students will spend approximately one day a week at their internship site, and will
return to the classroom to share their experiences. Students interested in enrolling in the Service Learning Internship must
interview with the course instructor one semester prior to the semester in which they will enroll in the course.

END

AFST 11350:

This course introduces students to in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme, including work with scholarly sources,
intensive writing and class discussion.

Topics in Africana Studies

END

AFST 11450:

Senior Seminar In Africana Studies

Prerequisites: AFST 11104, AFST 11304, and AFST 11305 or an equivilant methods course

The senior seminar in Africana Studies is designed as teh culmination of students' experiences in the various aspects of the
Africana Studies major. The course emphasizes and reinforces elements of the research and service components of the
Africana Studies major, while exploring original themes or focusing on more extensive and intensive study of themes
covered in survey courses. It will also provide for faculty and students an intellectual discussion community in which to
posit, examine, and disseminate cutting-edge scholarship and creative work, including interdisciplinary approaches to topics
in the study of peoples of African descent. Students will use critical thinking and analytical skills in understanding and
interpreting relevant literature, to develop a proposal for research, and to produce a substantial written research project
report, using either qualitative or quantitative research methods or an integration of both.

END

Fundamentals of Respiratory Care Lecture

RESP 09300:

Corequisites: RESP 09301

This course is designed to introduce the respiratory therapy student to the foundational principles of respiratory care and
will provide a basic understanding of the diagnostic and therapeutic modalities utilized in the current evidence-based
practice of respiratory care. This lecture course is designed to integrate with the Fundamentals of Respiratory Care Lab
course and create a foundation of basic knowledge and skills that can be reinforced in the Clinical Practice I course.

END

Fundamentals of Respiratory Care Lab

RESP 09301:

Prerequisites: Enrollment in the Program or Instructor Permission Corequisites: RESP 09300

This course is the laboratory course students will take concurrently with the RESP 09.300 Fundamentals of Respiratory
Care lecture course and will consist of demonstration, supervised practice and basic simulation of diagnostic and therapeutic
procedures associated with basic Respiratory Care.

END

Cardiopulmonary Anatomy & Physiology

RESP 09302:

Prerequisites: BSRT program admission

This course provides respiratory therapy students with a focused study of the anatomy and physiology of the
cardiopulmonary system as related to respiratory care. Topics of discussion will include a study of the anatomy and
physiology of the cardiac and respiratory systems with an emphasis on the interrelationship between these two and other
essential body systems. This course, along with other core courses will lay the foundation that is essential for subsequent
courses in the respiratory therapy curriculum.

END

Respiratory Care Pharmacology

RESP 09303:

Prerequisites: Program admission

This course is designed to introduce the respiratory therapy student to the basic principles of the pharmacology associated
with Respiratory Care. A special emphasis will be placed on drugs used to diagnose and treat diseases affecting the
cardiovascular and pulmonary systems.

END

Critical Care

RESP 09304:

Prerequisites: Program Admission

This course is designed to introduce the respiratory student to the critical care setting and will provide an overview of
various aspects of the respiratory and inter-professional care required to manage the critical care patient in this setting.

END

Clinical Practice I

RESP 09305:

Prerequisites: RESP 09301

This course is designed to orient the respiratory therapy student to the hospital clinical setting. Clinical instruction and
supervision are provided to help the student practice and hone the basic diagnostic, assessment and therapeutic skills
associated with respiratory care in the clinical setting.

END

Cardiopulmonary Evaluation

RESP 09306:

Prerequisites: Program admission and RESP 09300

This course is designed to build upon previously learned respiratory care theory and skills by introducing the respiratory
therapy student to advanced techniques associated with the progressive assessment and care of cardiopulmonary patients.
Basic and advanced pulmonary function testing, basic electrocardiogram interpretation, arterial blood gas interpretation and
basic hemodynamic assessments will be discussed as some of the various diagnostic and monitoring techniques used to
evaluate and treat patients with cardiopulmonary disease or conditions affecting the cardiopulmonary system.

END

Cardiopulmonary Pathophysiology

RESP 09307:

Prerequisites: Program admission and RESP 09300

This course is an exploration and analysis of the etiologies, pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and
disorders affecting the cardiopulmonary system. An emphasis is placed on the selection and development of appropriate
respiratory care plans.

END

Principles of Ventilatory Support I Lecture

RESP 09310:

Prerequisites: Program admission and RESP 09300 and RESP 09301

This course is designed to introduce the respiratory therapy student to the physics of gas flow, the physiological principles
of spontaneous ventilation and the rationale for and use of various devices and techniques used in the provision of
mechanical ventilation to all patients requiring artificial airways and or ventilatory support.

END

Principles of Ventilatory Support I Lab

RESP 09311:

Prerequisites: Program admission and RESP 09300 RESP 09301

This course is the laboratory component of the Principles of Ventilatory Support I course. In this course, instruction and
guided practice will focus on the insertion of artificial airways, the maintenance of artificial airways and the application of
both invasive and non-invasive mechanical ventilatory support devices. The proper use of devices used to measure and assess
the adequacy of ventilation will also be covered. The Monitoring and maintenance of the mechanically ventilated patient,
and weaning and liberation from ventilatory support devices and the discontinuation of life support will also be
demonstrated and practiced.

END

Clinical Practice II

RESP 09315:

Prerequisites: Program admission and RESP 09300 and RESP 09301 and RESP 09305

This course is a continuation of Clinical Practicum I and is designed to orient the student to the critical care environment.
Clinical instruction and supervision are provided to help the student refine the core objectives of Clinical Practicum I and to
allow the student to acquire the skills necessary for advanced patient assessment, initiation of non-invasive and invasive
ventilation, monitoring and management of the mechanically ventilated patient, weaning the ventilated patient, ventilator
liberation and assisting patients with the successful transition to spontaneous ventilation.

END

Introduction to Clinical Research

RESP 09400:

Prerequisites: Program admission

This course is an introduction to the fundamentals of clinical research, especially as related to the profession of respiratory
care. This course is designed to enhance the communication skills of respiratory therapy students in finding, evaluating and
incorporating research into discussions regarding respiratory care and clinical practice.

END

RESP 09401:

Evidence-based Practice

Prerequisites: Program admission and RESP 09400

This course focuses on the skills needed to critically examine research as evidence for current respiratory clinical practice.
In this course, respiratory therapy students will evaluate one or more current respiratory therapy clinical practice modalities
and find research evidence that either supports current practice or that indicates the need for change or revision.
Discussions will include quality and abundance of evidence and methods for communicating evidence in a way that supports
changes in practice or adaptation if support exists.

END

Pediatric and Neonatal Respiratory Care Lecture

RESP 09402:

Prerequisites: Program admission and RESP 09300 and RESP 09301

This course is designed to introduce the respiratory therapy student to the basic principles of the specialized respiratory
care provided for neonatal and pediatric patients. This course will focus on anatomical and physiological differences
between this group of patients and adults, as well as the various pathologies related to both neonatal and pediatric patient
populations.

END

Pediatric and Neonatal Respiratory Care Lab

RESP 09403:

Prerequisites: Program admission and RESP 09300 and RESP 09301

In this laboratory component of the Pediatric & Neonatal Respiratory Care course, instruction and guided practice will
focus on various types of therapeutic and ventilatory assistance devices used to care for neonatal and pediatric patients.

END

Respiratory Care in the Long Term, Home Care & Pulmonary Rehab Setting

RESP 09404:

Prerequisites: Program admission and RESP 09300

This course introduces the respiratory student to the many extra-hospital environments in which respiratory care is
provided. Students will be introduced to Long Term Acute Care, (LTAC) Sub-Acute Care Facilities, Skilled Nursing
Facilities, Pulmonary Rehabilitation facilities and the Home Care setting.

END

Principles of Ventilatory Support II

RESP 09410:

Prerequisites: Program admission and RESP 09310 and RESP 09311

This course is designed to expand upon the theories learned in RESP 09410 Principles of Ventilatory Support I by
introducing the respiratory student to airway pressure release ventilation, high frequency oscillatory ventilation, volumetric
CO2 monitoring, advanced ventilator graphics analysis, esophageal pressure measurement/monitoring and other advanced
diagnostic and therapeutic techniques used to care for critically ill or injured patients requiring mechanical ventilatory
assistance.

END

RESP 09411:

Principles of Ventilatory Support II Lab

Prerequisites: Program admission and RESP 09310 and RESP 09311

In this laboratory component of the Principles of Ventilatory Support II course, instruction and guided practice will focus
on advanced modes of mechanical ventilation and specialized devices used to monitor and support the critically ill patient
with severe disease affecting the cardiopulmonary system.

END

Clinical Practice III

RESP 09425:

Prerequisites: Program admission and RESP 09310 and RESP 09311 and RESP 09315

This course is a continuation of Clinical Practicum II and is designed to allow the respiratory student to hone and master
the skills required to practice in the critical care setting. Students will be required to complete 180 clinical hours in 12-hour
rotations and will work closely with and be supervised by a designated preceptor in each of several mandatory clinical
rotations including cardiovascular intensive care, trauma intensive care, emergency care and neonatal intensive care.

END

Clinical Practice IV

RESP 09435:

Prerequisites: Program admission and RESP 09310 and RESP 09311 and RESP 09425

This final clinical practicum course will further enhance the clinical education of the respiratory student through a series of
specialty rotations. Students will gain clinical experience in long-term acute care hospital facilities, pulmonary physician’s
offices, pulmonary rehabilitation facilities, homecare settings, and sleep labs.

END

Senior Seminar

RESP 09450:

Prerequisites: Program admission and RESP 09300

This is the capstone course of the BSRT program. This course is designed to complement learning after the completion of
all core respiratory courses. By applying the concepts learned in required BSRT courses, students are encouraged to analyze
current respiratory care practice and the current status of the respiratory therapists as members of the inter-professional
healthcare team and evaluate the need for change or improvement.

END

Advanced Concepts in Respiratory and Critical Care

RESP 09460:

This course is designed to introduce and discuss topics related to the state of the science of respiratory care. Discussions
will revolve around current best practices in respiratory assessment, diagnostics, and therapeutics in Respiratory Care,
especially in the critical care and emergency room settings.

END

Ethics and End of Life Issues

RESP 09462:

Prerequisites: Admission to the program or instructor permission

This course will revolve around various topics related to the ethical practice of respiratory care. The roles of respiratory
therapists and other members of the inter-professional team in caring for patients with terminal disease and their family
members will be discussed as well as the futility of medical intervention in End-Stage terminal disease.

END

Polysomnography and Topics in Sleep Medicine

RESP 09463:

Prerequisites: Program admission or permission of the instructor

This course will introduce respiratory students to the topic of polysomnography and other diagnostic measures utilized to
assess sleep disturbance and its effects on the cardiopulmonary system. CPAP and other treatment modalities are also
discussed.

END

Leadership in Respiratory Care

RESP 09464:

Prerequisites: Program admission or permission of the instructor

This course is an introduction to the various management and leadership roles in Respiratory Care. Discussions will
include decision making, cost reduction, the importance of inter-departmental collaboration, healthcare and academic
administration organizational structure, student retention, as well as other topics related to management/ leadership roles,
in both clinical and academic settings.

END

RESP 09465:

Capstone

Prerequisites: Program admission or instructor permission

This is the capstone course of the BSRT degree advancement program. Students will complete projects revolving around
topics related to cost reduction and quality improvement, evidence-based improvement of respiratory care, or advocacy and
improvement of public awareness of the Respiratory Therapy profession.

END

RESP 99070:

Respiratory Therapy Free Elective

END

Introduction to American Studies

AMST 13101:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This is an interdisciplinary course intended to introduce the methods and themes central to American Studies. The course
describes the typical methods of text, social, historical, and cultural analyses as they apply to the study of American society
and culture.

END

Interdisciplinary Research and Writing

AMST 13301:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and AMST 13101 or Corequisite:AMST 13101

Interdisciplinary Research and Writing provides a disciplinary and interdisciplinary approach to research and writing. The
students will gain a basic knowledge of the research methods and writing of three different disciplinary areas: Literary
Studies, History, and Social Sciences. These units will approach four questions in a parallel form for each field: What counts
as knowledge in this discipline? What counts as evidence in this discipline? How do we collect evidence? and, How do we
write up and write about our original research?

END

American Studies in the Classroom-WI

AMST 13320:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course provides students Social Studies skills for aspiring school teachers in all grade levels. Focusing on historical
periodization, primary sources, and map reading, this course focuses upon pedagogy and disciplinary methodology to
provide tools for effective social studies teaching at all grade levels.

END

AMST 13400:

Students will engage in an independent study project under the supervision of a faculty member. Topics will vary.

Independent Study In American Studies

END

Senior Seminar in American Studies - WI

AMST 13402:

Prerequisites: AMST 13301 and COMP 01112

This seminar provides the opportunity for students to engage in their own research into American Studies and to
significantly advance their own scholarly development in the field. Students interact with their instructor and the other
students in the seminar in the development and completion of individual projects. The central theme will vary by semester.
Topics may include: ethnicity, popular religion, slavery in North America, World War II at home and abroad.

END

ARHS 03103:

This course traces the history of painting, sculpture, architecture, and crafts in various global cultures from the Old Stone
Age through the Middle Ages. Museum resources in the greater Philadelphia region extend the classroom experience.

Art History Survey I: Prehistory to Medieval

END

ARHS 03104:

This course traces the history of Western visual arts from the Renaissance into the twentieth century. Museum resources
in the greater Philadelphia region extend the classroom experience.

Art History Survey II: Renaissance to Modern

END

Art Appreciation

ARHS 03130:

This general art appreciation course deals specifically with outstanding examples drawn from such diverse areas as product
design, architecture, interior design, drawing, painting, sculpture, printmaking and the creative crafts, taken from various
time periods in the history of the human family and from different places the world over.

END

ARHS 03205:

This course presents the history of the visual arts in the West from the mid-eighteenth century to modern times. There are
no pre-reqs but students are urged to take Art History Survey I and II prior to taking Art History Survey III.

Art History Survey III

END

Modern Art

ARHS 03220:

This course introduces significant creative visual art achievements of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Specific
areas of coverage include impressionism, post-impressionism, fauvism, expressionism, cubism, non-representational
directions, surrealism, regionalism, abstraction, pop art and hyperrealism.

END

Survey: Women Artists

ARHS 03230:

An introduction to the work of many female artists who form an important part of the history of art. In order to break
down stereotypes, each artist is discussed within the context of her society and with respect to her role in the art world.
Rather than canonizing a group of "great women artists," the course is intended to return female artists to their rightful
place in history through the study of individuals whose accomplishments demonstrate the tremendous effect women have
had on the visual arts. Since a single semester is too brief for an exhaustive study of women's contributions, this course
focuses on a selection of European and Americn artists from the sixteenth through twenty-first centuries.

END

Survey of Asian Art

ARHS 03231:

This course provides an introduction to the artistic traditions of China, Japan, India, Korea, and Southeast Asia with an
emphasis on historical, religious and social context. Focus on the arts of Buddhism, Hinduism, and other religious and
cultural influences on the visual arts.

END

History of Photography

ARHS 03241:

This course will present the 175 year history of photography in a comprehensive and detailed manner. Students will gain an
overview of the history of photography from its inception to present day. Emphasis will be placed on significant movements,
concepts and individuals relevant to the evolution of photography. Field trips to galleries and museums where photography
can be viewed will be an integral part of the course. Class sessions will consist of digital presentations of images and concepts
from the history of photography and will be supported by the required text. Classes will be augmented by readings and field
trips to galleries and museums.

END

Concepts In Art Criticism - WI

ARHS 03252:

Prerequisites: ARHS 03104 or ARHS 03220

This course is designed to help the students identify and employ methods of examining art works which allow them to
speak and write thoughtful judgments about the art in their world.

END

History of American Art

ARHS 03310:

A minimum of at least 30 s.h. completed.
This course provides students with an overview of the development of painting, sculpture and architecture in America
from colonial times to the 20th century.

END

Survey of Women Artists

ARHS 03340:

An introduction to the work of many female artists who form an important part of the history of art. In order to break
down stereotypes, each artist is discussed within the context of her society and with respect to her role in the art world.
Rather than canonizing a group of "great women artists," the course is intended to return female artists to their rightful
place in history through the study of individuals whose accomplishments demonstrate the tremendous effect women have
had on the visual arts. Since a single semester is too brief for an exhaustive study of women's contributions, this course
focuses on a selection of European and American artists from the sixteenth through twenty-first centuries.

END

History of Graphic Design

ARHS 03350:

Prerequisites: ART 09343 or ADV 04370

Graphic design from the 19th century to the present, with emphasis on European and American sources and some
examination of world design issues relevant to contemporary design practice. Discussion of events, ideas, movements,
designers and other individuals with historical significance and influence. Content topics will consider typography, graphic
translation, publication, identity and design systems, visual propaganda, and the effect of technology on design production
and creative output. Students without the pre-req may enroll with instructor's permission.

END

Contemporary Art

ARHS 03420:

Prerequisites: ARHS 03205 or ARHS 03220

This course explores the visual arts over the last thirty years, with particular emphasis on theory, criticism, political and
cultural influences, expanded media, and the art market.

END

Special Problems in Art History

ARHS 03425:

Prerequisites: ARHS 03103 or ARHS 03104

Special Problems in Art History is an intensive investigation of a specific movement, style, medium, or major artist.
Content changes each time the course is offered. Check the Schedule of Classes to determine specific area of study.

END

ARHS 03520:

Art Since 1945

END

ART 02100:

This course presents the basic representational skills and knowledge for effective drawing. It covers the elements and
fundamentals of perspective, composition, anatomy, light and shade and rendering.

Drawing I: Representational Drawing

END

Color and Design: Two Dimensional

ART 02105:

An introductory lecture/studio course dealing with compositional strategies, to teach students to manipulate elements in
dealing with solutions to the problems of aesthetics, function, and balance and the relationship between form and content.
In the studio student's work on selected conceptual problems in both black and white and color in various materials.

END

Figure Drawing

ART 02110:

Prerequisites: ART 02100 OR ART 02200 allows concurrency

This course consists of experimenting, exploring and improvising with techniques suitable for drawing representation of
such visual forms as figure and still-life. It also covers nonrepresentational approaches. For art majors only.

END

Expressive Drawing

ART 02200:

Prerequisites: ART 02100

This course will consist of experimentation, exploring, and improvisation with techniques suitable for representation of
visual forms such as still-life, landscape, and figures as well as non-representational approaches.

END

Color and Design: Three Dimensional

ART 02207:

Drawing on the experiences gained in the 2D design and color problems, this course teaches students to establish visual
excitement in a 3D format. Students deal with relationships of organic and natural structures and mechanical and geometric
forms, as well as methods for relating them to one another.

END

Intermediate Drawing IV

ART 02211:

Prerequisites: ART 02200

These studios are a continuation of fundamental drawing. They will include figure/life drawing, composition, technique,
and the analysis of human form, as well as other drawing problems.

END

Introduction to Painting

ART 02220:

Prerequisites: None

This course introduces students to basic concepts, techniques, materials and procedures of oil painting. Students are
encouraged strongly to take ART 02100: Representational Drawing before enrolling in this course.

END

Studio Core Portfolio Review

ART 02222:

After completing the Foundation Studio Core, each student will present a portfolio of 15 works executed in design and
drawing. This portfolio will include at least 8 drawings and at least 5 designs including no less than two three-dimensional
projects. Students will receive an evaluation of their portfolios, which is required before progressing on to the studio
specialization. Students sign up for this review the semester they are enrolling in their final studio courses of the Foundation
Core.

END

Introduction to Glass Working

ART 02239:

Prerequisites: ART 02240 OR ART 09240 allows concurrency

This introductory studio course is designed to teach students to use glass as an expressive art medium. It includes studio
work to develop skills and knowledge, as well as discussions and lectures to develop an understanding of both historical and
contemporary approaches to the medium. Students explore both sculptural and utilitarian forms in glass. Techniques
covered include slumping, fusing, kiln casting, lampworking and pate-de-verre.

END

ART 02240:

Introduction to basic processes, materials, and concepts of sculpture and three-dimensional problem solving techniques.
This course is designed to provide students with safety orientation for their use of equipment and materials.

Introduction to Sculpture

END

Intermediate Figure Sculpture

ART 02245:

Prerequisites: ART 02222

This studio emphasizes the analytical and expressive potential of the human figure in sculpture by working in a variety of
techniques and methods, including modeling in clay from the live figure. Techniques of moldmaking and casting are an
integral part of the course.

END

ART 02260:

The introductory course surveys techniques used in creating intaglio and relief prints. Demonstrated techniques include
etching, drypoint, woodcut, lino cut and other press and hand-printing processes.

Introduction to Printmaking

END

ART 02300:

This course explores various studio experiences and techniques. The area(s) to be covered will be identified prior to
registration each semester. For non-art majors only.

Workshop in Art

END

Intermediate Sculpture

ART 02301:

Prerequisites: ART 02240

Projected-based assignments are designed to foster a deeper understanding of sculptural form, employing traditional and
nontraditional modes, materials and processes. Emphasis is placed upon the development of skills, craft and critical &
conceptual thinking. The specific course content & media focus varies over several semesters.

END

Intermediate Glass Working

ART 02304:

Prerequisites: ART 02239

This intermediate studio course will further explore issues and techniques learned in Glass-Working I. Students will have
the opportunity to study in depth methods of forming glass that allow individual artistic expression and personal style to be
developed. Projects will be assigned according to the techniques and processes in which students are interested. Repeatable
3 times

END

Intermediate Painting

ART 02315:

Prerequisites: ART 02222

Intermediate Painting requires the pre-req of ART 02220 Introduction to Painting. This course continues continue
the study of painting, emphasizing the expressive and physical qualities of media, pictorial composition and color theory.

END

Intermediate Printmaking

ART 02317:

Prerequisites: ART 02260

These studios allow students to pursue further study in relief and intaglio processes both traditional and experimental
approaches. Also the possibilities of photography as it relates to printmaking in a variety of multi-block and multi-plate
color processes will be investigated.

END

Special Topics in Printmaking

ART 02318:

Prerequisites: ART 02222 and ART 02260

This course focuses on a particular topic within this studio specialty and offers an in-depth study of the concepts and
techniques used by artists who base their work on a particular genre. The topical content may vary each time the course is
offered.

END

Intermediate Figure/Life Painting And Drawing

ART 02325:

Prerequisites: ART 02220 and ART 02222

Students paint from life and costumed figures to strengthen their understanding of figure articulation, action, proportion
and anatomical construction.

END

Introduction to Watercolor

ART 02327:

This course explores the techniques and uses of watercolor and other water-soluble media that serves students’ needs and
interests in a variety of ways from journaling, sketching, documentation, design, and creating formal fine works of art. The
historical uses of this media and present day applications by artists will be introduced.

END

Selected Topics in Glass-Working

ART 02370:

Prerequisites: ART 02222

Selected topics to be presented may include lamp-working, stained glass, painting and enameling, history of glass-working
and, when facilities can be scheduled with Wheaton Village, glassblowing and/or glass casting.

END

Independent Study

ART 02400:

Intended primarily for students working at an advanced level in one of the regular studio areas, this course allows students
to complete various projects. Students must show sufficient maturity and experience to assure successful completion of the
proposed project.

END

ART 02401:

Prerequisites: ART 02301

These studios explore advanced problems in sculpture. Students work in consultation with the instructor.

Advanced Sculpture

END

Advanced Glass Working

ART 02404:

Prerequisites: ART 02403

This advanced studio course will utilize the techniques of Pate-de-verre, slumping, fusing, kiln casting and lamp working.
Students will work on projects agreed upon in a contract with the instructor. By this level, students are expected to be
operating at an advanced level of technique and aesthetic content. Repeatable 3 times

END

Advanced Painting

ART 02414:

Prerequisites: ART 02315

These studios provide advanced study emphasizing individual conception of the painted image, composition and design in
both representational or abstract painting.

END

Advanced Printmaking

ART 02430:

Prerequisites: ART 02317

In these studios, students continue to explore printmaking, developing problems that emphasize individual development
and discovery. These studios will be individualized to meet the requirements of advanced students

END

Experiencing Art

ART 09110:

This course provides art experiences as processes which, in a workshop environment, are developed by students into
expressional plastic forms. This course introduces work with the tools, materials, processes and purposes of art. Materials
used may include clay, paint, wood, plastics, metals and fabric. For non-art majors only.

END

Theory and Analysis of Art Education

ART 09200:

This course provides students with an historical knowledge base of the theories, philosophies and persons that have
impacted the teaching of art in public schools. Assignments will actively engage learners in developing their own teaching
philosophies as they examine current theoretical and pedagogical research, and the national and state curriculum standards
for teachers and students of the visual arts.

END

Community Art Education for Elementary Through Middle Grades

ART 09201:

Prerequisites: EDUC 20220 Corequisites: SMED 01350 and SECD 03330

This course introduces students to community visual arts programming and involves them in the practice of organizing for
art instruction and the teaching of elementary and middle school aged children who are enrolled in the Saturday Morning
Art program (smART).

END

Community Art Education for Secondary Grades

ART 09202:

Prerequisites: SMED 01350 and SECD 03330 Corequisites: SMED 31360 and SECD 03332

This course introduces students to community visual arts programming and involves them in the practice of organizing for
art instruction and the teaching of adolescents whose schools are partnering with the Saturday Morning Art (smART)
program.

END

Technology for the Art Classroom

ART 09203:

Prerequisites: None

This course prepares pre-service visual art teachers for media and technology applications in the art classroom. These
applications include, but are not limited to, using technology as an instructional tool, classroom management,
communication, assessment, professional development, and arts advocacy. The knowledge and skills of technology learned
from this course is not for content production purposes, but for helping pre-service teachers improve their teaching
performance.

END

Introduction To Metals And Jewelry

ART 09210:

This course introduces metal fabrication techniques including piercing, cold connecting, forming, texturing, soldering, and
finishing of non-ferrous metals in order to create small-scale metalwork and jewelry. Technical skills and craftsmanship will
be stressed while the students explore ideas and concepts through this three-dimensional medium.

END

Jewelry and Metal Casting

ART 09212:

Prerequisites: ART 09210

This course deals with various metal casting processes, using a variety of metals. The course provides an in-depth learning
experience through intensive independent work.

END

ART 09225:

This course provides an overview of the field of puppetry, including history, construction, playwriting and performance. It
includes studio work.

Introduction to Puppetry I

END

ART 09226:

This course is devoted to structuring puppet experiences in the classroom and teaching with puppets.

Intermediate Puppetry II - Puppetry In Education

END

Introduction to Illustration

ART 09228:

Prerequisites: ART 02100 OR ART 02200 allows concurrency

This course provides students with an introductory experience with illustration. Students will work with basic visual,
technical and expressive problems in preparation for further study in illustration.

END

Introduction to Ceramics

ART 09240:

An introductory studio/lecture course designed to teach students to use clay as an expressive art medium. It includes studio
work to develop technical skills and knowledge along with discussions and lectures to develop an understanding of both
historical and contemporary approaches. Students explore both utilitarian and sculptural forms in clay.

END

Introduction to Figure Anatomy for the Artist

ART 09251:

This course is designed to strengthen the students understanding of observational figure drawing and anatomy. Students
will develop skills and techniques to accurately recreate the human form by learning the fundamentals of skeletal and muscle
anatomy of the human body. The course will serve to improve observational and realistic figure drawing skills, by learning
the anatomical relationships and techniques for visualizing form. This course will provide the student the opportunity to
interpret anatomy knowledge by working directly from the figure in the drawing studio and the human cadaver at the
Cooper Medical School.

END

Introduction to Natural Science & Zoological Illustration

ART 09252:

This course is designed to develop a strong foundation in concept development and observational drawing skills. As well as
integrate traditional and introductory digital media techniques within the subject matter of drawing plants, animals, and
natural science content. Both traditional forms of media (graphite, pen/ink, charcoal, color pencil etc.) and digital forms of
media production will be used to illustrate subjects through demonstrations and visual problems. The course will focus on
the integration of traditional and digital media, as it related to realistic and representational drawing. Students will learn
professional production methods and design conventions within the field of natural science and zoological illustration.

END

Introduction to Digital 3D Modeling

ART 09253:

This is an aesthetics based media course that communicates digital 3D content for both biomedical art (didactic) media
and entertainment media (illustration, animation, game design etc.). The course is designed to cover concepts in digital 3D
organic and inorganic object modeling, which includes observational modeling, conceptual process modeling, and narrative
modeling. Students will learn to develop a broad range of modeled content including but not limited to characters, objects,
and environments. The digital models designed are rendered and composited as 2D illustration to solve specific visual
communication problems. The software (Autodesk 3D Studio Max and Mudbox) used in the course are industry standards
for 3D computer graphics production. The subject matter within the Specialization in Biomedical Art and Visualization
reflects the subject matter of science and medicine. Students in broader areas of art (sculpture, illustration, painting, etc.)
will be able to focus on specific subje4cts relevant to their artistic goals using the 3D methods and techniques.

END

Digital Media And Techniques

ART 09301:

This foundation course introduces students to digital media in solving art and design problems. Through demonstrations
and hands-on experience, students will explore various computer software applications related to the fine arts and graphic
design.

END

Professional Practices in Art I

ART 09303:

Prerequisites: ART 09390 or Permission by Instructor

This course is designed to provide art majors with an in depth exploration of the professional practices artists undertake in
order to establish and foster a professional career in the arts. Students will be explored to a variety of resources, techniques,
and methods available to help build their careers after bacculaureate graduation.

END

Digital Painting

ART 09304:

Prerequisites: ART 02100 and ART 02105 and ART 02200 and ART 09301

Digital Painting is the generation of original art using software as a primary means of applying color to a digital canvas as a
fine art medium. Students will build from existing skills covered in foundational art courses (Drawing I Representational
Drawing, Color and Design, Expressive Drawing, Digital Media and Techniques) to create images that utilize photo
reference, art history, observation, and conceptual problem solving. Assignments will explore the relationships between
traditional media and digital media with respect to different methods of color application. Workspace organization, file
management, and workflow best practices will also be integral to the course.

END

ART 09306:

This course provides extended study in art. The topical content may vary each time the course is offered. Students may
enroll in this course multiple times.

Special Topics in Art

END

ART 09307:

This studio course provides extended study in art. The topical content may vary each time the course is offered. Students
may enroll in this course multiple times.

Special Topics in Art Studio

END

Color Theory

ART 09308:

This course covers the basic elements of color theory and also provides an opportunity to explore intuitive and practical
applications of color in the making of art. Students will consider visual and aesthetic interactions of color, classification, the
science of color perception, and psychological and cultural aspects of color in art and design. The course combines lecture,
demonstration, and critique with intensive hands-on exploration.

END

ART 09310:

This course is devoted to structuring puppet experiences in the classroom and teaching with puppets.

Intermediate Puppetry III

END

Intermediate Metals and Jewelry

ART 09311:

Prerequisites: ART 09210

These courses have a rotating topic of emphasis and build on the techniques and process learned in Introduction to
Metals/Jewelry. The semester long topics include forming, vitreous enameling, and small-scale casting. Students will apply
these techniques to create unique concept driven jewelry and metalwork. Contact the professor to inquire about the topic of
emphasis for the semester.

END

ART 09313:

This course is devoted to structuring puppet experiences in the classroom and teaching with puppets.

Intermediate Puppetry IV

END

Special Topics in Metals/Jewelry

ART 09314:

Prerequisites: ART 09210

This course focuses on a particular topic within this studio specialty and offers an in-depth study of the concepts and
techniques used by artists who base their work on a particular genre. The topical content may vary each time the course is
offered.

END

Public Art & Social Practice Studio

ART 09322:

This project-based studio course provides art students with applied experience in socially engaged art practice, an
interdisciplinary and collaborative approach to investigating social issues through art in the public sphere. Students will
develop and apply the values, methodologies, and leadership skills for collaboration with people in local communities and
public spaces through art.

END

Public Art & Social Practice

ART 09323:

This course explores the societal roles and contexts of art in public space. Both art and non-art majors are introduced to
socially engaged art practice, an interdisciplinary and collaborative approach to investigating social issues through art in the
public sphere. Students develop the values, methodologies, and skills for collaboration with people in local communities and
public spaces through art.

END

Art & Environment Studio

ART 09324:

This project-based studio course explores contemporary artistic responses to the environment. Students will be introduced
to art movements, works, and practices addressing social and political issues relating to natural and urban environments.
Students will incorporate environmental art questions and methods into their own studio practice and design an artistic
response to an environmental and sustainability issue through cross-disciplinary collaboration.

END

Art & Environment

ART 09326:

This course explores contemporary artistic responses to the environment. Both art and non art majors will be introduced
to art movements, works, and practices addressing social and political issues relating to natural and urban environments.
Through cross-disciplinary collaboration, students will design an artistic response to an environmental and sustainability
issue.

END

Visual Narrative

ART 09327:

Prerequisites: ART 02100, ART 02105, ART 02200 and ART 09301

This fine art studio course explores storytelling through visual expression. The practice and history of visual storytelling
will be examined from a variety of intertextual perspectives and will include a chronological exploration from the earliest
mark-makers, artists, architects, designers, illustrators to its present-day integration into illustration, storyboarding, graphic
novel, social media, and VR/AR technologies. The course will explore visual storytelling with regard to concepts, form,
mediums, methods, techniques, markets, technologies and will evaluate and compare works from a variety of cultures and
perspectives. This fine art course will pay special attention to issues and influences with regards to gender, race, culture, as
well as industry. Fine art studio-based projects, exercises, readings, and writings will be assigned as well as quizzes and a final
project in which students will demonstrate critical analyses of storytelling for a variety of markets.

END

Intermediate Illustration

ART 09336:

Prerequisites: ART 09228

These courses provide in-depth study emphasizing the dynamics of the image and the symbolic and expressive use of visual
language. Draftsmanship, and the application of technique and materials are studied and reviewed in periodic critiques of
work in progress. Students will also continue work on developing a professional portfolio.

END

Introduction to Graphic Design I

ART 09343:

Prerequisites: ART 02100 AND ART 02105 AND ART 09301 which allows concurrent enrollment

Introduction and orientation to the design discipline through visual problem-solving, critical analysis, readings and writing.
This process-based course is focused on fundamentals of image translation, typographic terminology, visual organization,
and concept development. Using digital and traditional media, students will expand their visual vocabulary, problem-solving
skills, conceptual thinking, and digital proficiency in creative explorations of theory, history, and practice.

END

Intermediate Graphic Design II: Typography

ART 09344:

Prerequisites: ART 09343 OR ADV 04370

This course emphasizes typography as the carrier of meaning. It investigates functional and formal properties of type and
typographic conventions and standards including scale, weight, style; classification systems and history; spacial relationships
and principles of composition. Students gain understanding of grids and hierarchy, legibility and clarity, while exploring the
expressive potential of type through readings, research, and exercises with digital and traditional media.

END

Computer Aided Design (CAD): 3D Modeling for the Artist/Designer

ART 09346:

Prerequisites: ART 02240

This course is concerned with the visualization and creation of 3D computer-generated models and their applications in
the art and design world. Students will be instructed in the principles of 3D modeling using computer modeling software and
will be introduced to a variety of 3D model applications as they are used in object and concept design. Students will be
taught to conceptualize, develop, detail, present, and communicate on content as well as functionality of designs.

END

Intermediate Graphic Design III: Visual Identity

ART 09349:

Prerequisites: ART 09344, may be taken concurrently

With an emphasis on symbols/logos, this course focuses on developing original imagery and organizing type/image
relationships for print and in digital motion. Students will be introduced to visual identity systems and branding, tailoring
design communications for defined audiences. They will investigate additional methods and processes for problem-solving
in professional practice, expanding proficiency in all aspects of the design process: context and conceptual development,
critical thinking, collaboration, design production and presentation.

END

Intermediate Graphic Design IV: Packaging

ART 09350:

Prerequisites: ART 09349

This course explores three-dimensional form development of theoretical and applied packaging techniques. Content
emphasizes structural design and packaging types, surface graphics, and typography. Working from project briefs, students
are introduced to genre-specific issues including production methods and materials, branding, retail/wholesale markets,
legislative requirements, product launches, and professional guidelines for best practices in contemporary packaging.

END

Computer Art Techniques I

ART 09351:

This course introduces students to the techniques made possible by the computer with design, drawing and painting
programs. The course explores the computer's ability to execute designs as well as copying, rescaling, mirroring, rotating,
color permutation, tapering, shadowing filling and animating.

END

Intermediate Ceramics

ART 09352:

Prerequisites: ART 09240

These studios provide advanced students an opportunity for intensive, self-structured, independent work. Studio work,
kiln construction, advanced clay and glaze formulation is covered. There are on-going critical analyses of individual work and
its relation to contemporary aesthetic issues.

END

Special Topics in Graphic Design

ART 09354:

Prerequisites: ART 09343 OR ADV 04370

Exploration of topical studies in graphic design and typography to address emerging issues or specialized content in skills,
knowledge, theory, and/or attitudes and behaviors pertinent to technology or professional practice. Content may vary each
time the course is offered. Students may enroll in this course multiple times; students without the pre-req may enroll
with the instructor's permission.

END

Introduction to Digital Rendering and Illustration Methods

ART 09356:

This course is designed to develop strong observational skills, and integrate digital media rendering and painting
techniques within the scope of biomedical content and visual problems solving. This goal will be to convey an aesthetically
powerful illustration, which effectively provides a solution for a specific visual communication. The student will learn a
vocabulary for expressing pertinent natural science and medical art concepts in relation to technique design, composition,
object accuracy/integrity, and context. Students will learn digital rendering techniques and methods to depict concepts in
digital continuous tone and color (Adobe Photoshop and Illustrator). The integration of digital techniques will be uses in
unique ways to explore the boundaries of medium and convention in modern production. Elective students in the broader
areas of Art, Design, Science, and Medicine will be required to apply the concepts and techniques taught in class to specific
content pertinent to their major of study.

END

Web Design: Designing For The World Wide Web

ART 09358:

Prerequisites: ART 094344 OR ADV 04370

This course introduces students to basic concepts and techniques for conceptualizing, planning and designing intelligent,
usable, and well-designed web sites. Students will explore principles in communication hierarchy based on contemporary
internet standards for use on computer and/or mobile devices. They will learn to manage content and develop relationships
of type and image for clarity, distinctiveness and contextual appropriateness. Students without the prerequisite may enroll
with instructor’s permission.

END

Design: Interactivity and Motion Graphics

ART 09359:

Prerequisites: ART 09343 OR ADV 04370

This course introduces students to concepts, issues, and techniques related to web design and motion graphics, giving
them the tools to create and publish animated web sites, produce e-learning content, edit and author audio, as well as create
basic online games. Students will also learn about the theory and practice of artists working in this medium.

END

Storyboarding & Animation

ART 09360:

This is an aesthetics based course that communicates animated narratives in the areas of art and science. This course serves
as an introduction to animation of objects, environments, animals, humans and natural science subjects. Students will learn
to create 2D and 3D animations of narratives with goals to communicate a message and/or educate the viewer on their story.
The student will learn pre-visualization skills in the form of storyboarding to problem solve their ideals before animation.
The student will use pre-visualized concept art to animated short stories of the body, environment, and/or natural science
through the medium of 2D and 3D digital animation software (Adobe Flash, After Effects and Autodesk 3D Studio Max.)
The principles of 2D and 3D digital space and motion/timing will be used as the foundation of production. The subject
matter within the Specialization in Biomedical Art and Visualization reflects the subject matter of science and medicine.
Students in broader areas of art (sculpture, illustration, painting, etc.) will be able to focus on specific subjects relevant to
their artistic goals using the animation methods and techniques.

END

Scientific and Medical Sculpture

ART 09361:

This course is designed for students interested in learning the structure, anatomy, and features of the head and its relation
to facial reconstruction. This course will strengthen the student’s understanding of the muscles in the face, bone, and
landmarks of the skull. Students will also understand how these two groups contribute to each individual’s appearance. Age,
race, and gender will be discussed and considered in the re-creation of the face. Demonstrations of techniques, lectures, and
critiques are part of the course work. Projects will include study sheets, in-class assignments and some projects that can be
completed at home. However, most assignments will be done in class. The course is needed for the instruction of advanced
techniques and concepts in biomedical visualization. The course contains specific projects, which reflect the demands of
industry specialization and career training expectations. Specific visualization problems in: medical sculpture, prosthetics,
and forensic sculpture are required in the course.

END

Advanced Graphic Design V: Publication Design

ART 09363:

Prerequisites: ART 09349

An advanced studio course investigating narrative and expressive use of grids, typography, photography and illustration for
editorial and information design. Course content includes discussion of editorial vs. advertising design; serial versus
monographic visual organization; the roles of graphic designer, art director, and creative director; and contemporary
implications and integrations of print and digital presentation.

END

Advanced Graphic Design VI: Infographics and Professional Practice

ART 09364:

Prerequisites: ART 09350 (allows concurrency) OR ART 09360.BMV 09360 (allows concurrency

This course integrates two key areas: information visualization and critical theory for professional design practice.
Working individually and in teams, students will learn to design for clarity and accuracy to visualize factual, abstract,
invisible, and sequential data in print and animated formats. Through lectures, readings and case studies, they will consider
the practice of design management including issues of pricing, intellectual property, scheduling, and design responsibility
and sustainability in a global culture.

END

Time-Based Media: Animation

ART 09365:

Prerequisites: ART 09301

This course is a hands-on studio workshop that covers concepts, issues, and techniques related to 2-D animation, exploring
the growing range of genres and applications from within the arts including stop-motion, computer-generated animation
and experimental animation techniques. Students will create their own 2-D animations as well as study the theory and
practice of artists working in the medium. This course supports the fine arts experience by cultivating innovation, visual
creativity, experimentation, intellectual enquiry and the acquisition of professional animation techniques.

END

Introduction to 3D Animation Introduction to 3D Animation

ART 09366:

Corequisites: BMV 09630 and BMV 09253 Prerequisites: ART 09253 and ART 09360

This studio course is designed as an introductory platform to aesthetically investigate and discover specific techniques in
3D Animation as applied to commercial industry standards and outcomes. This course introduces students to all the major
features of 3D Animation software with a focus on specific 3D animation techniques from basic expressions of time, curves,
motion paths, shape deformations, basic rigging, introductory dynamics and simulated scenarios (fluid, cloth and particles),
along with teaching the professional workflow for multi-frame rendering and short movie composites. The student is
exposed to all relevant aspects of 3D Animation CG creation with an eye toward giving the student a base foundation from
which to explore and expand their creative ideas and stories. Students will learn how to depict narratives in 3D with a focus
on their major specific content, interdisciplinary projects and collaborations. The lecture and demonstrations in the course
are balanced between learning 3D animation software and the art studio practice of applied theory, history, and concepts
that give a foundation of context and audience reception. The Introduction to 3D Animation course is open to all majors
with the required pre-reqs.

END

Advanced Problems in Biomedical Art

ART 09373:

Prerequisites: ART 02222 and (ART 09251 or BMV 09251 ) and (ART 09252 or BMV 09252) and (ART 09356 or BMV 09356)

This course entails developing skills and knowledge necessary for effective visual communication of complex biomedical
concepts and subject matter. The focus will be on developing conceptual visual story telling skills. Students will learn to take
complex information presented by specific biomedical subject matter and selectively simplify it to solve visual
communication problems effectively for the target audience. Students will work exclusively in digital media to develop
competence and efficiency in the rendering methodologies and learn the conventions of modern production. The course is
needed for the instruction of advanced techniques and concepts in biomedical visualization. The course contains specific
projects which reflect the demands of industry specialization and career training expectations. Specific visualization
problems in: medical/legal, veterinary, pharmaceutical, molecular, editorial, textbook, journal visualizations and required in
the course.

END

Advanced Puppetry V

ART 09380:

Prerequisites: DESN 09225 or ART 09225 and DESN 09226 or ART 09226 and DESN 09310 or ART 09310 and DESN 09313 or
ART 09313

These courses study in-depth a specific phase of puppetry. They emphasize hand and rod puppets, shadow puppets and
black theatre, marionettes and the history of puppetry.

END

ART 09381:

These studio courses offer in-depth involvement with sophisticated puppetry techniques. Students will develop individual
expertise, style and approaches to the art of puppetry.

Advanced Puppetry VI

END

ART 09390:

Work In Progress Review

A required review of work-in-progress for all B.F.A. students.

END

ART 09401:

Each B.A. student will prepare and mount selected works as a senior exhibition or execute an equivalent project. Required
for graduation.

Senior Show or Project

END

ART 09405:

These studio courses offer in-depth involvement with sophisticated puppetry techniques. Students will develop individual
expertise, style and approaches to the art of puppetry.

Advanced Puppetry VII

END

ART 09406:

These studio courses offer in-depth involvement with sophisticated puppetry techniques. Students will develop individual
expertise, style and approaches to the art of puppetry.

Advanced Puppetry VIII

END

Advanced Metals and Jewelry

ART 09411:

Prerequisites: ART 09311

Advanced students will utilize the skills learned in Introduction and Intermediate levels of Metals/Jewelry to
independently research ideas and techniques in order to create concept driven jewelry or metalwork. Student and professor
will work together to establish direction in creation of individual pieces or a body of work.

END

Advanced Illustration

ART 09419:

Prerequisites: ART 09336

Students will pursue advanced work concentrating on further development of the illustrator's vocabulary and procedures.
Assignments are developed in consultation with the instructor. Periodic critiques are held to help each student develop a
complete professional portfolio.

END

Animation Practicum

ART 09430:

Prerequisites: (ART 09230 or BMV 09360) and (ART 09253 orBMV 09253) and (ART 09366 or BMV 09366)

This studio-based course provides an opportunity for students to fully apply the skills they have learned to create a short,
animated film for their demo reel and portfolio. This demo reel and portfolio will demonstrate an understanding of
animation techniques appropriate to the current industry. Students will be free to use any style and medium of their choice
and, with instructor’s approval, focus on themes for portfolio and festival submission.

END

3D Digital Fabrication

ART 09436:

Prerequisites: ART 09346 or ART 09253 or ME 10101

In this course students will design and create tangible three-dimensional art and design objects using a variety of digital
processes combined with hands on techniques. Three-dimensional forms will be created using the laser cutter, 3D scanner,
3D printers, vacuum former, and CNC router. In addition to emphasis on technical skills, students will be challenged to
create finished objects or prototypes that solve artistic design problems and concepts.

END

Advanced Ceramics

ART 09450:

Prerequisites: ART 09352

This advanced production course combines extensive research and scriptwriting skills with sophisticated field production
techniques. Students select subjects of local interest to feature in high-quality, 20 minute documentaries involving
pre-production planning, extensive field shooting, and prost-production editing on Avid editing systems. Field production
includes use of single and multiple camera units.

END

Computer Art Techniques II

ART 09452:

This course allows students to draw, paint, animate, layout and design using computers and software. Students may
specialize in fine arts, illustration, drawing, crafts, interior designing, textiles, package design lettering/typography or
desktop publishing. Students develop their own professional portfolios of computer art.

END

Introduction to Game Media Design

ART 09453:

This is an aesthetics based course that communicates and focuses on educational and casual game content through the
fundamentals of game media design. The course materials and projects will help students understand how and why games
can be used for learning in the fields of health, medicine, science, and social change. Students will also learn how casual
games can be a powerful learning tool in social situations. The course exposes students to examples of current work and
research in game design mechanics, game art production, game learning mechanics, and assessment mechanics, which are
important to designing successful and engaging games. Students will learn use traditional drawings media, the Adobe
Creative Cloud, and specific game engines to develop their games. Students will be exposed to industry-specific examples of
educational and casual games (social games, learning games, news games, health and science games, and exercise-games etc.)
These examples alone with specific lecture topics, demonstrations and material, will allow students to learn how to develop
their own educational and casual games projects that deliver content through game media and design.

END

Surgical Illustration and Media

ART 09454:

Prerequisites: ART 02222 and (ART 09251 or BMV 09251) and (ART 09356 or BMV 09356)

This studio course is an introduction to the illustration of surgical procedures and its fundamental application within the
discipline of biomedical art. It is based on the belief that understanding the concepts of medical/and or veteinary surgery is
essential to creating effective illustrations and other media that visually communicate the information. Students will
research surgical procedures and techniques, sketch procedures in the operating room, prepare comprehensive sketches
outlining visual narrative of surgical procedures, and render final illustrations/media presentations using a variety of digital
media.

END

Biomedical Art Senior Thesis Exhibition & Portfolio Capstone

ART 09456:

Prerequisites: ART 02222 and (ART 09251 or BMV 09251) and (ART 09252 or BMV 09252) and (ART 09356 or BMV 09356) and
(ART 09360 or BMV 09360) and (ART 09453 or BMV 09453) and (ART 09454 or BMV 09454) and (ART 09253 or BMV 09253)
and ART 09352 and ART 09353

This course is designed to act as a summative experience for the student. The final BFA Thesis Project will be defined by
the student and work with a level of professional collaboration. The requirements for the BFA Thesis will be to solve and
effectively visually communicate a medical and scientific problem. Integration of outside resources, research effective
collaborator/expert communication, professional practices, presentation (oral and written) and documentation of the
process of the semester long project. The project visualization will be student driven; content needs will be determined by
the student and the research/collaboration. The emphasis in this course will be on the conceptual development of the
content accuracy/relevance and its realization through the design process. The final B.F.A. capstone project will have the
following: A two Sentence (Maximum) Thesis Statement, a designed/written proposal, research paper, business oriented
documentation, a digital presentation to explain the work, artist statement/project scope statement, and the final project
depicting the solution for the BFA Exhibition.

END

Advanced Graphic Design VII: Internship

ART 09463:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

Students are encouraged to seek internships in the design industry to further their professional skills and understanding of
the design profession. Faculty will assist in preparation and placement but the student is expected to take initiative in
seeking this experience. Design industry experience is under the supervision of both university and employer; written and
oral critique of activity is required.

END

Advanced Graphic Design VIII: Identity Systems and Portfolio

ART 09464:

Prerequisites: ART 09363

This capstone course is focused upon conceptual investigation and development of comprehensive identity systems and
formulation of design standards. Students will work individually and in teams to resolve client-based problems. There may
be direct client contact. Professional development is also addressed: portfolio formats, resumes, interviews skills, actual and
virtual presentation approaches, and job-seeking strategies. The course culminates with a formal public presentation of a
design portfolio by each student.

END

B.F.A. Senior Thesis Exhibition

ART 09490:

This experience allows students an opportunity to enhance their portfolio skills. This exit evaluation, in the form of a solo
exhibition, will give students an occasion to make note of their work development and to determine their progress as
emerging professional artists.

END

Bioinformatics: Biological Applications

BINF 05355:

Prerequisites: BINF 07250

This course in bioinformatics covers the application of modern computational and functional genomics methods to
current questions in biological and biomedical sciences. Bioinformatics approaches and philosophy will be highlighted
through exploration of research problems in cell and developmental biology, molecular biology, population genetics,
evolutionary biology, and ecology. Collaborative learning and problem-solving using computational, statistical and genomics
methods will be emphasized.

END

Programming for Molecular Biology

BINF 05360:

Prerquisites: (MCB 01102 with minimum grade of C- OR BIOL 01203 with minimum grade of C-) AND BINF 05250
This lecture course is designed for third or fourth year students in the Bioinformatics major. Students will learn the
programming skills necessary to be competent in writing programming to analyze primary research data. Specifically,
students will expand on their understanding of basic unix command line programming and further develop fluency in
programming languages, including Python and R, (specifically analytics, not visualization). This course will involve
considerable practical application, and students will learn to analyze data critically, design experiments, collect and interpret
data, create graphs and figures, and present their results in oral presentations and formal lab reports.

END

Introduction to Bioinformatics

BINF 07310:

Prerequisites: (CHEM 06101 and BIOL 01106) or BIOL 01107 or MCB 01102 (all courses require C- or better)

This course serves to establish a broad foundation in the multidisciplinary field of bioinformatics. Building upon a general
background in chemistry and biology, this class engages students in modern computational methods that have transformed
our understanding of the fundamentals of molecular biology (e.g., protein and DNA structures, gene transcription, protein
translation). This course emphasizes the application of computational methods to solve problems in basic and applied
biology and biochemistry.

END

Bioinformatics: Biochemical Applications

BINF 07399:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07201 or (CHEM 07202 and BIOL 01106) or CHEM 07203

This introductory course in bioinformatics covers the application of modern computational methods to the fundamentals
of molecular biology (protein and DNA structure, transcription and translation). The biochemical tools of molecular biology
will be discussed. Methods of aligning DNA sequences will be studied in relation to mutations, phylogenetic tree analysis,
forensic science, and genetic diseases. Algorithms for protein structure prediction, microarray technology and gene
expression will be explored. Computer based lab exercises will support the topics presented.

END

Bioinformatics Seminar

BINF 07500:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07595 and BIOL 05555 and CS 07595

This advanced literature survey course in bioinformatics covers current and emerging topics in the field of Bioinformatics
through the analysis of current primary literature. The multidisciplinary nature of bioinformatics will be highlighted
through examples of computational approaches to solving biological, biochemical, and applied biomedical research
problems. Emphasis is placed on the interplay between computational methods and how they are applied to solve real
problems in biology and biochemistry. Students will engage in semester-long research projects culminating in a presentation
of a topic from the primary literature.

END

Bioinformatics: Advanced Biochemical Applications

BINF 07595:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07548

This introductory course in bioinformatics covers the application of modern computational methods to the fundamentals
of molecular biology (protein and DNA structure, transcription and translation). The biochemical tools of molecular biology
will be discussed. Methods of aligning DNA sequences will be studied in relation to mutations, phylogenic tree analysis,
forensic science, and genetic diseases. Algorithms for protein structure prediction, microarray technology and gene
expression will be explored. Computer based lab exercises will support the topics presented. Students will be required to do
a literature based research project.

END

Biology I

BIOL 01100:

This course studies the chemical properties of protoplasm; cell structure and cell division; metabolic processes in
organisms, including photosynthesis and respiration; principles of genetics including Mendelian laws; evolution and
ecological relationships of organisms.

END

Biology II

BIOL 01101:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01100

This course provides a brief survey of the different kinds of plants and animals; the roles of hormones and enzymes;
tropisms; growth and development; plant and animal tissues and organ systems.

END

Introduction to Evolution and Scientific Inquiry

BIOL 01104:

Prerequisites: MATH 01100 to 01499 or STAT 02100 to 02499 or MATH 03100 to 03499 with min of grade of D- or S02 min score
550 or S12 min score 570 or A02 min score 24 or ALG min score 77 or CLM/CLMR min score 40

This laboratory course is designed for freshman Biology majors and is the first of a four-course introductory sequence. This
course introduces students to organismal diversity and its evolutionary origins, covers the fundamental concepts of
evolutionary theory, and surveys many of the ways that organisms have become adapted to their environments. In addition,
students in this course will learn some of the basic skills necessary for scientific inquiry, including the scientific method,
critical thinking, experimental design, and the gathering, analysis, and presentation of quantitative data. Credit will not be
given for both Introduction to Evolution and Scientific Inquiry (BIOL 01104) and Biology I (BIOL 01100). Priority for
enrollment will be given to students declared as Biology majors, Biology minors, Bioinformatics majors, Computer Science
majors, Biochemistry majors, Environmental Studies majors, Environmental Studies minors, or Pre-Medical concentration.

END

Essentials Of Biology

BIOL 01105:

Prerequisites: CHEM 05102

This laboratory course provides an introduction to cell and tissue structure, cellular reproduction and metabolism, and
mechanisms of evolution. A brief survey of the plant and animal kingdom emphasizes how their systems have changed
through evolution.

END

Introduction to Genetics

BIOL 01106:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01104 with C- or better and CHEM 06100 with minimum Grade of D-

This course is designed for first year biology majors and builds on skills and knowledge gained by the students from
Introduction to Evolution and Scientific Inquiry. The course focuses on the study of genetic factors in bacteria, viruses,
higher plants and animals. The principles of Mendelian, molecular and population genetics will be introduced. Discussion of
genetic applications in agriculture, biotechnology, and medicine will be an integral part of the course. The laboratory
projects will provide the students with the opportunity to gain hands-on experience with the most common classical and
molecular genetics methods. Credit will not be given for both Introduction to Genetics (BIOL 01106) and Biology II (BIOL
01101).

END

Introduction to Biological Skills for Transfer Students

BIOL 01107:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01.100 or BIOL 01.101.

The laboratory course is designed for students transferring into the Biology major after having completed only one
semester of biology ((Biology I (BIOL 01100) or Biology II (BIOL 01101)) at another institution. This course will introduce
students to topics covered in Introduction to Evolution and Scientific Inquiry (BIOL 01104) and Introduction to Genetics
(BIOL 01106) while introducing a variety of scientific skills covered in those courses including critical thinking,
experimental design, data collection, analysis, and interpretation, and oral and written scientific presentation. Credit will
not be given for both Introduction to Genetics (BIOL 01106) and Introduction to Biological Skills for Transfer Students
(BIOL 01107).

END

BIOL 01110:

This non-laboratory course acquaints students with the structure and function of man. It stresses the major organ systems
of the body.

Human Biology

END

Scientific Process and Biological Discovery

BIOL 01111:

This course introduces the practice of scientific inquiry through the analysis of current biology research as presented in
popular medi a and scientific publications. Students will gain skills in critical reading and scientific analysis as they develop
an understanding of the scientific method and how scientific discovery progresses.

END

General Biology: Environmental Focus

BIOL 01112:

This one-semester laboratory course provides an introduction to the basic concepts of the biological sciences, including,
but not limited to, origin of life, evolution of multicellular organisms, population and community ecology, and a survey of
the modern kingdoms of living organisms. Emphasis will be placed on ecological and conservation problems. Laboratory
exercises enable the student to visualize many of the concepts discussed in class. No credit toward biology major.

END

General Biology: Human Focus

BIOL 01113:

This one-semester laboratory course provides an introduction to the basic concepts of the biological sciences, including,
but not limited to, cell biology, the body plan and organ systems of vertebrate animals, genetics and heredity, and vertebrate
evolution. Emphasis will be placed on how these topics relate to the human organism. Laboratory exercises enable the
student to visualize many of the concepts discussed in class. No credit toward biology major.

END

General Biology: Plants And People

BIOL 01115:

This laboratory course considers the diversity of uses of plants in human cultures, and the biological bases for their utility.
The course is primarily concerned with the positive impact of plants, including their roles in human nutrition, medicine,
clothing, fuels, building materials, and ecosystems. It also considers the negative impact of plants as weeds and health
hazards. Students who complete this course will have a comprehensive understanding of the importance of plants in human
societies, from a biological perspective. No credit toward biology major.

END

Pharmacognosy

BIOL 01201:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204

This is a lecture/demonstration course which studies the science that embraces the history, source, cultivation, collection,
preparation, distribution, commerce identification, composition, purity and preservation of drugs of plant origin.

END

Biological Skills for Transfer Students

BIOL 01202:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01100 and BIOL 01101

This laboratory course is designed for students transferring into the Biology major after having completed Biology I and
Biology II at another institution. This course will review key topics covered in Introduction to Evolution and Scientific
Inquiry, Introduction to Genetics, and Introduction to Cell Biology (BIOL 01104, BIOL 01106, and BIOL 01203) while
introducing students to a variety of scientific skills covered in those courses. Examples of skills include critical thinking,
experimental design, reading of primary literature, data collection, analysis, and interpretation, and oral and written
scientific presentations. Credit will not be given for both Introduction to Cell Biology (BIOL 01203) and Biological Skills for
Transfer Students (BIOL 01202).

END

Introduction to Cell Biology

BIOL 01203:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01106 with C- or better

This laboratory course introduces students to the fundamentals of cell biology, including the cellular basis of life, cell
evolution, cellular organization, cell metabolism, cell diversity, cell-cell communication, intracellular signaling and the
cellular basis of disease.

END

Introduction to Ecology

BIOL 01204:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 01211 or BIOL 01202 with C- or better

This laboratory course serves as the capstone for the biology core curriculum. Students will learn integrative concepts
linking topics from earlier introductory courses together in terms of population, community, and ecosystem-level ecological
processes. We will explore these concepts through case studies covering diverse topics from biodiversity patterns to
anthropogenic effects on individuals to ecosystems. This course will reinforce the skills introduced in earlier core courses,
and will build upon these skills with further expectations of writing, primary literature synthesis and review, and critical
thinking.

END

Biology for Chemical Engineers

BIOL 01211:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06100 and CHEM 06101

This course develops a basic understanding of the biology of living things. Topics include the organization, function,
development and differentiation of cells, the temporal and spatial cooperation of biomolecules and cells under the control of
signal transduction, the genetic programming of cells and organisms, and the interconnection of various life forms through
evolution. Also covered is application of these concepts and processes to modern bioengineering focus areas, such as
bioinformatics, genomics, proteomics, tissue engineering, and systems biology.

END

Phycology

BIOL 01300:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This laboratory course considers the algae. It studies the relationships of these organisms as they are ordered in taxonomic
schemes. Proper identification of specimens will be emphasized. May not be offered annually.

END

Data Science for Biologists

BIOL 01301:

Prerequisites: minimum of Sophomore standing

This laboratory course will introduce students to the fundamentals of biological data analysis using modern-day "data
science" techniques. Students will learn novel statistical methods (i.e. permutation tests) that leverage the power of "big
data," data visualization theory and approaches, as well as data modeling approaches for biological data using the "tidyverse"
suite of packages in the R programming language. Notably, this course assumes no prior knowledge of programming, in R or
otherwise. Additional emphasis will be placed on skills heavily used in data science careers, including data cleaning,
management, visualization, and professional communication. Students will have the opportunity to pursue independent

END

Advanced Evolution

BIOL 01310:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This laboratory course considers organic evolution, including its conceptual basis, its historical development, the processes
that produce it, and the evolutionary history of life on earth. Laboratory exercises will include simulations of evolutionary
processes, demonstrations illustrating patterns of evolution in the past, and opportunities to utilize research techniques of
evolutionary biology.

END

Introduction To Mycology

BIOL 01325:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This lecture and laboratory course provides a comprehensive treatment of the morphology, taxonomy, physiology, and
ecology of fungi, and their involvement in man's everyday life. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Darwinian Medicine

BIOL 01341:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 OR MCB 01102

The theory of evolution is the foundation of biological sciences but until relatively recently has been underemphasized in
medicine. The traits and phenomena that medicine usually examines from the perspective of such fields as genetics,
physiology, or development also have an evolutionary basis. Understanding the evolution of these traits can both improve
our understanding of disease and change the way it is treated. This course examines evolutionary explanations for such
health phenomena as infectious disease, genetic disease, human growth and development, reproduction, and aging.

END

Molecular Evolution

BIOL 01342:

BIOL 01203 with minimum C- or higher ORMCB 01102 with minimum C- or higher
The course will introduce the field of molecular evolution which examines evolutionary change at the level of DNA and
protein sequences. Students will learn mechanisms of genetic evolution within and between species, methods to quantify
sequence evolution, and phylogenetic models and inference.

END

Biodiversity and the History of Life

BIOL 01350:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 or BIOL 01206 or MCB 01102

This course investigates the evolution of biodiversity over the courses of Earth history. Students will survey the diversity of
life and investigate current understanding of the evolutionary relationships among organisms based on a variety of data.
Students will also study biodiversity through geologic time, including examining fossil evidence for the origins of major
groups and for extinction events and their causes.

END

Climate Change Biology

BIOL 01351:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204

One of the most important questions in biology, from both a human perspective and in terms of the biodiversity and
ecological function of Earth, is what the consequences of anthropogenic climate change might be. This course reviews
modern scientific understanding of the consequences of climate change for organisms past, present and future by drawing
integrative perspective from biological sub-disciplines including organismal biology, evolution, ecology, and conservation
science.

END

Ornithology

BIOL 01352:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This course covers anatomy, physiology, ethology and ecological parameters of the avian community. Laboratory and field
investigations form a significant part of the course. May not be offered annually.

END

Parasitology

BIOL 01356:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This lab course examines the biology of organisms that normally grow only in or on the living body of another, and from
which they obtain nourishment.

END

Conservation Biology

BIOL 01405:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This laboratory course for upper-level students majoring in biology is designed to familiarize students with the current
crisis in global biodiversity. The objectives of this course are to examine fundamental and applied aspects of genetics,
population and community ecology, paleontology and systematics, agriculture and forestry, wildlife biology and zoo
management, and sociology and economics. Laboratory and field exercises are designed (1) to introduce students to local,
regional and global conservation issues and (2) to emphasize synthesis and creativity in addressing conservation problems.

END

Regenerative Biology

BIOL 01409:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01203 or BIOL 01202 or MCB 01102

Regenerative Biology explores regeneration in diverse species from ecological, evolutionary, and mechanistic perspectives.
Using an integrative biology approach, current research utilizing diverse regeneration models will be analyzed and its
application to regenerative medicine will be explored.

END

Developmental Biology

BIOL 01428:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 01211 orBIOL 01202 with C- or better

This course studies the development of multicellular organisms from fertilization, through embryonic and post-embryonic
stages. Topics 
include fertilization, cellular differentiation, regulation of gene expression, pattern formation,
morphogenesis, and evolution of developmental mechanisms. Experimental approaches of developmental biology will be
emphasized.

END

BIOL 01430:

Advanced Cell Biology

Prerequisites: BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 01202 with C- or better

This laboratory course addresses the fundamental properties of cells from an experimental perspective by exploring
modern and classic experiment approaches to the study of cell biology. Structural, biochemical and molecular aspects of cell
function will be considered.

END

BIOL 01440:

Special Topics In Biological Sciences

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with a C- or betterand Senior standing

This seminar course is a literature-driven exploration of a broad range of topics in individual areas of the biological
sciences. The particular subjects discussed will examine both fundamental and cutting-edge biological processes and
technologies. Students will be required to give oral presentations on the selected topics. They may be also asked to submit
written reports. This course is expected to strengthen the skills of students in critical reading and evaluation of the primary
scientific literature. This course is required for all Biology majors.

END

BIOL 01445:

Special Topics In Biological Sciences - WI

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 and at least one 300 or 400 level biology elective and Senior Standing

This writing intensive seminar course is a literature-driven exploration of a broad range of topics in individual areas of the
biological sciences. The particular subjects discussed will examine both fundamental and cutting-edge biological processes
and technologies. Students will develop skills in writing through writing activities designed to emphasize the process and
structure of scientific writing. This course is also expected to strengthen the skills of students in critical reading and
evaluation of the primary scientific literature. This course is required for all Biology majors.

END

Independent Study In Biological Sciences

BIOL 01450:

Students conduct independent work on a project concerned with biological science with the supervision of a selected
faculty member. This course requires development and execution of the proposed work, including preparation of an
acceptable report of work completed.

END

Herpetology

BIOL 01454:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

Students make an intensive study of the behavior, ecology, evolution and physiology of amphibians and reptiles.
Laboratories stress identification, gross anatomy and techniques.

END

Mammalogy

BIOL 01458:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This course provides a detailed study of the mammals of the world. Its topics include: the anatomy, behavior, ecology and
systematics of the class. Laboratory work emphasizes the mammals of New Jersey as well as field work.

END

Genome Sciences

BIOL 01459:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 OR MCB 01102

This laboratory course provides the student with a survey of the highly interdisciplinary field of Genome Sciences.
Students will engage critically with the primary literature to master concepts in topics including genome sequencing
technology and analysis, comparative and evolutionary genomics, structural genomics, environmental and conservation
genomics,and genomics in human health and disease. Students will additionally have the opportunity to directly collect and
analyze genomic data using state-of-the-art methods.

END

Animal Behavior

BIOL 01460:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better orPSY 10380

This laboratory course investigates the proximate and ultimate factors, natural selection, phylogenetic, and cultural bases
of animal behavior. In this course, students will develop an appreciation of the interaction of the environment and other
organisms on the development, production, and function of animal behaviors in both naturalistic and controlled situations.
Conceptual, theoretical, and empirical approaches to behavior will also be discussed. Students will be expected to observe,
manipulate, and analyze the behaviors of a wide variety of animals such as insects, birds, and fish through hands-on methods.

END

BIOL 01465:

Animal Histology

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This upper level lecture and laboratory course provides an in-depth study of animal tissue. It includes the examination and
identification of specific cells, tissues and organs. The students will develop laboratory skills in cytological and histological
techniques. The relationship of histology to cell biology, physiology and pathology will be emphasized.

END

Ichthyology

BIOL 01470:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This course is a senior-level zoology course designed to introduce students to the fundamental aspects of the biology of the
major groups of fishes. Topics to be discussed in class include taxonomy and systematics of the major groups of fishes, a
survey of modern fishes, their basic structure and function, behavior, and ecology. Laboratory exercises are designed to
introduce students to current methods, approaches, and topics; field exercises are designed to survey the diversity of fishes
and their habitats in New Jersey and nearby states.

END

Biology Lab/Field Research

BIOL 01475:

This course introduces and/or develops research techniques used in biological research. Research is performed in
collaboration with one or more faculty in an area of specialization of the faculty. Emphasis will be placed on developing
research skills, developing technical writing skills, and the development of skills needed for scientific presentations. Up to
three credits from this course may be counted towards the major; additional credits may count as free electives.

END

Introductory Botany

BIOL 02300:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This laboratory course considers the biology of plants. It is a broad survey of plant nutrition, physiology, development,
anatomy, morphology, reproduction, evolution and ecology. An emphasis is placed on the structure and function of plants
and the relevance of plants to humanity and the global environment.

END

Plant Diversity

BIOL 02301:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This laboratory course considers the patterns of plant diversity and the processes that generate and maintain plant
diversity. Several types of diversity are assessed for each of the major groups of plants, including diversity in morphology,
physiology, evolution, ecology and human economy. Students who complete this course will have a better understanding of
the types and sources of plant diversity, and the role of human and nonhuman factors in affecting plant diversity.

END

Flora of New Jersey

BIOL 02350:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This laboratory course is an exploration of the local flora in terrestrial communities, from the shore to the Pine Barrens.
The emphases of this course are plant communities and the identification of plants. It also provides an overview of plant
conservation and the features of plants that determine their population dynamics. The focus of the laboratories is several
all-day field trips. Offered during summer sessions.

END

Plant Physiology

BIOL 02405:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better and CHEM 07200

This course will cover the principles and factors concerned with development of plants, including nutrition, water
relationships, photosynthesis, chemosynthesis, reproduction, and growth.

END

BIOL 02410:

Stream Ecology

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This course covers topics in the area of study concerned with the physical, chemical, biological and ecosystems processes in
creeks, streams and rivers (so-called lotic environments or related running waters). The course has a strong laboratory
component with hands-on research in an effort to understand local stream ecology.

END

Hematology

BIOL 03300:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 01100

Immunohematology is a subfield of hematology focused upon antigen-antibody reactions and their implications for
transfusion medicine. This laboratory course will cover the basic immunology of human blood systems and the application
of this knowledge to blood and tissue banking, transfusion therapy, and disease processes.

END

Immunohematology

BIOL 03401:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 01100

Immunohematology is a subfield of hematology focused upon antigen-antibody reactions and their implications for
transfusion medicine. This laboratory course will cover the basic immunology of human blood systems and the application
of this knowledge to blood and tissue banking, transfusion therapy, and disease processes.

END

Invertebrate Zoology

BIOL 07300:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This laboratory course will focus on the diversity and adaptations of single-celled and multicellular invertebrates. We will
explore the current understanding of the evolutionary relationships among taxa, using both traditional morphological and
contemporary genetic approaches.

END

Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy

BIOL 07301:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This laboratory course provides an intensive comparative study of the gross and microscopic anatomy of vertebrate
animals, including dissection of representative chordates.

END

Comparative Biomechanics

BIOL 07400:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better orMCB 01102 with C- or better and PHYS 00211or PHYS 00221

This upper-level Biology elective with lab examines the function of organisms in terms of mechanics. Focusing mainly on
animals, the course covers topics such as locomotion and feeding in both aquatic and terrestrial environments, as well as
looking at systems such as circulation and respiration in terms of fluid mechanics.

END

Human Anatomy and Physiology I

BIOL 10210:

This course offers a molecular, cellular and systematic approach to the structure and function of the component units and
organizational systems of humans. Emphasis is placed on cells, tissues, membrane physiology and the skeletal, muscular and
nervous systems.

END

Human Anatomy and Physiology II

BIOL 10212:

This laboratory course focuses on the gross and microscopic structure of the body. The course is the second semester of a
two-semester sequence that covers all of the functional systems of the human organism. In this course, the systems of the
body to be studied in detail include the endocrine, cardiovascular, respiratory, excretory, digestive, and reproductive
systems. Whole body metabolism and fluid balance will also be studied.

END

Work Physiology

BIOL 10350:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This course studies the effect of short term and long term work stress on the human organism. This course may not be
offered annually.

END

Animal Physiology

BIOL 10401:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This laboratory course provides the student with in-depth knowledge of the various systems of the animal body. Students
will understand and predict the structure-function relationships across various animal groups from the molecular to the
organismal level. Specific adaptations to environmental conditions, whether naturally occurring or as a result of acclimation
to new areas, will be discussed. Students will also investigate the various processes of homeostasis and system regulation that
exist in animals. Physiological simulation and dissection preparations will be used to provide the student with hands-on
skills on physiological research methodology and techniques.

END

Microbiology

BIOL 11330:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 01211 with C- or better

This course deals with the morphology and physiology of unicellular organisms, with emphasis upon bacteria. It studies
culture methods, growth parameters, isolation, identification and characterization, and metabolism of microorganisms in
the laboratory.

END

Environmental Microbiology

BIOL 11405:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better and BIOL 11330with C- or better

This course covers topics related to microorganisms in the environment. It deals with the actions of microbes in the
terrestrial, aquatic, air and plant/animal environment and places focus on microbial control and microbial applications.

END

Introduction to Biochemistry - Lecture Only

BIOL 14440:

Prerequisites: (BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 01211 or BIOL 01202 with C- or better) and CHEM 07201 with D- or better

This course investigates chemical compounds and chemical reactions which are of paramount importance to the
functioning of biological systems. It also examines the major metabolic pathways for energy production and biosynthesis.

END

Pine Barrens Ecology

BIOL 18304:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204

The Pine Barrens are a landscape mosaic of related ecosystems (including streams, lakes, wetlands, and forests) that feature
sandy soil, low nutrient availability, high acidity, and regular disturbance via fire. This course considers the complex
ecological interactions between species (including humans) and the abiotic environment in Pine Barren ecosystems such as
those found in New Jersey. Special emphasis will be given to species that are endemic to the Pine Barrens of New Jersey.
This is a lab-based course and will include field trips to local Pine Barren Ecosystems.

END

Marine Biology

BIOL 18360:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

Field and laboratory oriented, this course studies the interrelationships of marine animals and plants and provides
instruction and experience in collecting and identifying examples of local marine flora and fauna.

END

Limnology

BIOL 18400:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This course intoduces basic and applied concepts in limnology, or the study of fresh waters. It analyzes the physical,
chemical, biological and ecosystems processes in lakes (so called lentic environments). The course has a strong laboratory
component with hands-on research in an effort to understand regional lake ecology.

END

Introduction To Oceanography

BIOL 19300:

This course introduces the varied techniques of the oceanographer; it emphasizes recent developments in the field of
Marine Sciences as well as physical, chemical, geological and biological aspects of the world's oceans. Field work required; a
trip on a research vessel recommended. Offered only in the summer at the New Jersey Marine Sciences Consortium
facilities.

END

Coastal Marine Geology

BIOL 19425:

This course includes a field study of the geological processes of the beach, bay, lagoon, estuary and salt marsh; it also covers
erosional and depositional features and sediment analysis. Field experience is supplemented by laboratory work and
individual projects. Offered in the summer at New Jersey Marine Sciences Consortium facilities.

END

BIOL 20100:

This introductory course considers natural resources and their relationship to man and society. For science and
non-science majors.

Introduction To Natural Resources

END

Human Ecology: An Evolutionary Approach

BIOL 20150:

This course will take an evolutionary approach to understand how the environment has shaped biological and cultural
changes in humans, and how humans have and are continuously impacting the environment. The emphasis of this course will
be to understand the biological, cultural and environmental diversity that has emerged through human history and its impact
in the intricate interactions among humans and between humans and their environment.

END

Advanced Ecology

BIOL 20310:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better and STAT 02280

This course emphasizes population, communities and ecosystems. It studies aspects of energy flow, species diversity and
population dynamics in a variety of ecosystems. The course requires laboratory and field work.

END

Physiological Ecology

BIOL 20321:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This course studies the physiological aspects of basic ecological principles and concepts, and the adjustments which
organisms make in response to changing environmental factors. May not be offered annually.

END

Environmental Science

BIOL 20330:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This course covers topics related to general environmental issues, the flow of energy and matter through the environment,
the natural resources to sustain life, their use and abuse, and the governmental laws and regulations concerning the
environment. The course deals with the environmental ethics faced in today's society, the impact of pollution both to the
environment and to humans, and the factors involved in urban ecology.

END

Principles Of Ecology

BIOL 20401:

Prerequisites: STAT 02260, CHEM 05102, MATH 03315 and BIOL 01100 or STAT 02260, CHEM 05102, MATH 03315 and BIOL
01105

This course covers basic topics related to the ecological understanding of the environment from a point of view of
population dynamics and community structure as well as individual organism's ecology. It includes case studies of applied
ecology.

END

Environmental Toxicology

BIOL 20425:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or betterand CHEM 07200

This course covers topics related to the fate and impact of pollutants in the environment. This course deals with the laws
and regulations of pollutant discharge, the kinds of chemical pollutants, the transport and distribution of such chemicals
into the environment, and their effect in populations and communities as well as individual organisms. The acute and
chronic effect of these pollutants, the principles of environmental monitoring and assessment, and special examples and case
studies will be analyzed.

END

BIOL 20474:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This course studies salt marsh development and physiography, community structure, energetics and interrelationships.

Tidal Marsh Ecology

END

Entomology

BIOL 21401:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This course studies the insect anatomy; physiology and insect control; historical and economic significance of insects in
man's society; methods of collecting, preserving, rearing and mounting of insects; insect classification. This course may not
be offered annually.

END

Advanced Genetics

BIOL 22335:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 01211 or BIOL 01202 with C- or better

The course will provide an in-depth background in all areas of Mendelian, molecular, population and evolutionary genetics.
The students will learn how to use genetic tools in dissecting complex biological pathways, developmental processes and
regulatory systems. Discussion of landmark genetic experiments will constitute the basis of an inquiry-based approach that
will delineate the dynamic nature of modern genetics. The laboratory exercises are designed to put special emphasis on
molecular biology techniques and the use of bioinformatics.

END

Comparative Embryology

BIOL 27403:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01204 with C- or better

This laboratory course focuses on the morphological and physiologic processes involved in embryogenesis of animals. The
course includes the development of echinoderms, amphibians, birds, and mammals. Considerable emphasis will be placed on
organogenesis and the development of organ systems.

END

Undergraduate Research Thesis

INTR 01340:

Prerequisites: Instructor Permission

This course teaches undergraduate students how to enhance undergraduate research experiences through the preparation
of an undergraduate research thesis. Topics covered include exploration of the academic literature in each student's research
field, proper citation of the literature, data analysis and visual representation techniques, paraphrasing while avoiding
plagiarism, and effective scientific writing. Students are expected to have foundational understanding of the academic
literature and an ongoing research experience. This course may be taken more than once in the process of building toward a
comprehensive Undergraduate Research Thesis.

END

Foundations in Biology for Biomedical Sciences I

MCB 01101:

This laboratory course is the first of the two semester sequence designed for students not majoring in Biology but
interested in pursuing studies in biomedical areas through advanced Biology courses. This sequence serves as an
introductions to fundamental biological concepts and the foundation for upper-level biology courses for such students. Both
courses of the sequence focus on genetics, cell biology, and evolution and theory relation to human health. This course
focuses more specifically on the molecular basis of variation and heredity and its evolutionary context.

END

Foundations in Biology for Biomedical Sciences II

MCB 01102:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01205 or MCB 01101

This laboratory course is the second of the two semester sequence designed for students not majoring in Biology but
interested in pursuing studies in biomedical areas through advanced Biology courses. This sequence serves as an
introduction to fundamental biological concepts and the foundation for upper-level biology courses for such students. Both
courses of the sequence focus on genetics, cell biology, and evolution and their relation to human health. This course focuses
on molecular and cellular mechanisms of life and their evolutionary context.

END

Molecular Biology Methods

MCB 01201:

Prerequisites: MCB 01102 or BIOL 01203; or permission of instructor

This laboratory course is designed for second year students in the Molecular and Cellular Biology major. Students will learn
the current theory and methods of Molecular Biology, including cloning, restriction digestion, DNA and RNA analysis,
PCR, qPCR, protein analysis, Western blots, and genetic manipulation of cells. This course will involve considerable
labwork, and students will learn to analyze data critically, design experiments, collect and interpret data, create graphs and
figures, and present their results in oral presentations and formal lab reports.

END

Translational Cell Biology

MCB 01306:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01206 or BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102

This course focuses on translational approaches of cellular processes towards analysis, diagnostics, and treatment of human
diseases. Topics including biological causes of cellular and metabolic diseases, molecular diagnostics, gene therapy, and stem
cell therapy will be addressed.

END

Translational Cell Biology Lab

MCB 01307:

Prerequisites: MCB 01102 or BIOL 01203 grade of C- or better; Corequisites: MCB 01306

This laboratory course is designed to complement the undergraduate-level Translational Cell Biology course (MCB 01306).
It explores a range of fundamental cellular biology questions that have a direct impact in treating human diseases and the
experimental approaches needed to answer them. Students will use genetically tractable disease models to learn how cell
biology methods can be applied to disease. This course will combine laboratories and project-based learning experiences, in
which students will further develop skills in experimental design, performing experiments, data processing and analysis, as
well as oral and written communication.

END

Special Topics in Molecular & Cellular Biosciences

MCB 01308:

Prerequisites: MCB 01102 and BIOL 01203 grade C- or better

This course is designed for 3rd and 4th year students and will explore a specialized topic in the area of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences. Topics discussed will investigate areas (e.g. Epigenetics, Cancer Biology, Systems Biology) and/or
innovative approaches to treating disease (e.g. Gene editing, Immunotherapy, Precision Medicine). Students will be
expected to perform literature reviews to determine the current status in the particular area of study. This course will
involve review of current literature, critical reasoning and group discussion,as well as written and/or oral reports.

END

Introduction to Virology

MCB 01320:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 01211 or BIOL 01202 with C- or better and at least Junior status

This laboratory course explores topics such as virus origin and evolution, their physical structure and chemical
composition, taxonomy, and modes of transmission. The mechanisms involved in their control of the machinery of their
host cells will be studied in detail. Particular focus will be placed on important virus-associated human and animal diseases,
AIDS, and the role of viruses in cancer.

END

Cellular Biochemistry

MCB 01333:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07203; Restricted to TBS majors

This course is intended to introduce students majoring in Translational Biomedical Science to fundamental biochemical
principles. This will include structure and function of biomolecules, biochemical pathways in cells, cellular processes, and
examples that are relevant to disease states. The laboratory component will focus on the basic biochemical techniques
required for purification and analysis of biomolecules.

END

MCB 01334:

Medical Biochemistry

Prerequisites: BMS 01333 or MCB 01333 or CHEM 07348 or BIOL 14440

This course is intended to introduce students majoring to fundamental biochemical principles relating to disease states.
This will include structure and function of biomolecules, biochemical pathways in cells, and cellular processes relevant to
diseases and medical disorders. Special emphasis will be placed on reviewing and evaluating peer-reviewed medical literature.

END

Biophysics I

MCB 01360:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 OR MCB 01102

This course is aimed at understanding the physics of biological systems. The goal of the course is to quantitatively define
biological systems and their functions. Key emphasis will be placed on (1) understanding theories, laws, and axioms that
govern systems and their behavior and (2) the use of physics to determine quantitative information about systems and their
behaviors. For each topic, the basic laws of physics will be reviewed followed by their application to specific biomolecular or
biological system examples. The laboratory component is aimed at giving students hands-on experience in measurement and
observation for biological systems.

END

Molecular Microbiology

MCB 01407:

Prerequisites: MCB 01102 with minimum grade of C- OR BIOL 01203 with minimum grade of C-

The Molecular Microbiology course will address concepts that are essential for understanding of the molecular biology of
microorganisms: environmental sensing and signal transduction pathways: regulation of gene expression: transcription,
bacterial operons, and post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms; bacterial cell division and its regulation, bacterial cell
wall biosynthesis, mechanisms of adherence and invasion, molecular mechanisms of bacterial persistence and antibiotic
resistance. This course provides students with opportunities to study advanced methods of genetic engineering: DNA
cloning, the nature, selection and design of DNA cloning vectors, restriction enzymes, modifying enzymes, polymerases,
bacterial transformation, Western blot, and other tools and techniques used in molecular biology. Some aspects of
bioinformatics and genomics, as well as other advanced molecular technologies will be discussed.

END

General Aspects of Infectious Agents

MCB 01414:

Prerequisites: BMS 01333 or MCB 01333 or CHEM 07348 or BIOL 14440

This course aims at preparing students for health professions and biomedical research by exploring the biology of
infectious agents and host-pathogens interactions. Infectious agents among viruses, bacteria, parasites and/or fungi will be
selected to examine life cycles, pathogenicity and therapy. Translational use of pathogens in disease prevention and
therapeutics will also be explored.

END

Fundamentals in Cell Culture Techniques

MCB 01421:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 01211 or BIOL 01202 with C- or better and at least Junior status

This course features hands-on instruction to introduce students to techniques, methodologies, principles, and applications
of cell culture. The students will learn principles of cell culture in monolayers and suspension as well as concepts of cell
differentiation and tissue histology.

END

Cell Culture Technology

MCB 01435:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 01211 or BIOL 01202 with C- or better and at least Junior status

This laboratory course introduces advanced biology students to the history, theory, and techniques of maintaining live cells
in long-term culture. The combination of lectures and laboratory experiences have been designed to demonstrate cell
biology in both theory and practice. The course is very much geared to a "hands-on" approach in the context of real
laboratory operations in neighboring work areas.

END

Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience

MCB 01481:

Prerequisites: At least Junior Status and B+ or higher in PSY 10315 or BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or Permission of Instructor

This lecture course will cover the major issues of cellular neurosciences, including molecular and cellular events underlying
neutral signaling, synaptic transmission, neuronal development and migration, and neuronal plasticity will be discussed.
Topics include the cellular structure of neurons and glia, neurogenesis, synaptogenesis, molecular bases of neuronal
transmission and memory, and the genetics of behavior. Special attention will be paid to current issues such as stem cell
transplantation, neuronal regeneration of the central nervous system, neurological disorders, and animal models being used
in these areas.

END

Graduate Translational Cell Biology

MCB 01506:

This graduate course focuses on advanced translational approaches of cellular processes towards analysis, diagnostics, and
treatment of human diseases. Topics including biological causes of cellular and metabolic diseases, molecular diagnostics,
gene therapy, and stem cell therapy will be addressed.

END

Graduate Cell Culture Techniques

MCB 01521:

This graduate course features hands-on instruction in the techniques, methodologies, principles, and applications of
mammalian cell culture. The students will learn principles of cell culture in monolayers and suspension as well as concepts of
cell proliferation, viability, differentiation and tissue histology. Stem cell phenotypes and differentiation genetic marker
profiles will be compared for adipogenesis, chondrogenesis, and osteogenesis.

END

MCB 01538:

This graduate course studies infection and resistance and the principles and types of immunity and hypersensitivity.
Laboratory applications include: antigen-antibody formation, structure and reactivities.

Graduate Immunology

END

MCB 01550:

This graduate course considers the principal concepts in biochemical genetics including gene function and regulation,
DNA replication, and mutation. Laboratories focus on fundamental biotechnology concepts and techniques.

Graduate Molecular Genetics

END

Human Physiology

MCB 10345:

Prerequisites: (BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 01211 or BIOL 01202 withC- or better) and CHEM 07200 with D- or better and
at least Junior status

This course surveys the basic physiology of the human organism, emphasizing the nervous and circulatory systems.

END

Human Physiology Lecture

MCB 10346:

Prerequisites: MCB 01102 or BIOL 01203 with grade C- or better and CHEM 07201; Junior Status

Human Physiology is a lecture course aimed at preparing students for health professions or a career in biomedical sciences
by supplementing their knowledge with the understanding of whole human systems. A strong foundation in the interactions
between whole systems is important for students planning a career in biomedical sciences and health professions. This
human physiology course will provide students with an understanding of biological systems from cells to organ systems.

END

Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience

MCB 10481:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 with a B+ or higher

This lecture course will cover the major issues of cellular neurosciences, including molecular and cellular events underlying
neutral signaling, synaptic transmission, neuronal development and migration, and neuronal plasticity will be discussed.
Topics include the cellular structure of neurons and glia, neurogenesis, synaptogenesis, molecular bases of neuronal
transmission and memory, and the genetics of behavior. Special attention will be paid to current issues such as stem cell
transplantation, neuronal regeneration of the central nervous system, neurological disorders, and animal models being used
in these areas.

END

Immunology

MCB 11338:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 orBIOL 01211 or BIOL 01202 with C- or better and at least Junior status

This course studies infection and resistance and the principles and types of immunity and hypersensitivity. Laboratory
applications include: antigen-antibody formation, structure and reactivities.

END

Concepts in Human Genetics

MCB 22410:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 01211 or BIOL 01202 with C- or better and at least Junior status

The course will discuss the application of genetics principles to the human species. All major areas of genetics such as
transmission genetics, cytogenetics, biochemical genetics, molecular genetics and population genetics will be covered. The
emphasis will be placed on fundamental concepts and technological advances in the study of human genetics as they pertain
to medical practice. The principles of human genetics applied to counseling, screening, ethics, law, and the evaluation of
their social implications will also be addressed. The laboratory sessions will focus on the practical analysis of various case
studies related to different human genetic disorders. Oral presentation of primary literature articles by the students is
expected.

END

Molecular Genetics

MCB 22450:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 0211 or BIOL 01202 with C- or better and at least least Junior status

This course considers the principal concepts in biochemical genetics including gene function and regulation, DNA
replication, and mutation. Laboratories focus on fundamental biotechnology concepts and techniques.

END

Human Genetics

MCB 22598:

Patterns of transmission of single gene traits, human biochemical genetics, autosomal and sex-linked chromosomal
anomalies, immunogenetics and blood groups, screening for genetic diseases and prenatal diagnosis. Lecture, laboratory
sessions or the equivalent. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Introduction to Neuroscience

NEUR 01301:

Prerequisites: MCB 01102 or BIOL 01106

This course provides an introduction to the mammalian nervous system with specific emphasis on the structure and
function of the human nervous system. Topics include the history of neuroscience, basic neuroanatomy and
neurophysiology, nervous system organization, nervous system development, cellular communication, the human senses,
learning and memory, and disorders of the brain.

END

Neuroanatomy & Physiology

NEUR 01302:

Prerequisites: NEUR 10301

This lecture/lab course is designed to provide students with a working knowledge of the structures of the brain and their
associated functions. Components of the mammalian central and peripheral nervous system will discussed and compared to
nervous systems found in non-mammalian systems. Students will also learn about how these structures develop, propagate
signals, and how they are altered in various disease states.

END

Neuroscience Seminar

NEUR 01480:

Prerequisites: NEUR 01301

This course is designed to provide students with hands-on and working knowledge of relevant, current knowledge in
neuroscience. It will serve two primary functions for those majoring in Neuroscience: provide a mechanism by which
students can pursue laboratory research in neuroscience and serve as a neuroscience journal club to discuss peer-reviewed
literature. Thus, selected sections of this course will run as research sections, and others as journal clubs. Neuroscience B.S.
students must take two semesters of this course, using any combination of section types they prefer.

END

Neuroscience Research Clinic

NEUR 01491:

Prerequisites: NEUR 10301

This course is designed to provide students with hands-on and working knowledge of relevant, current research in
neuroscience. By providing a mechanism by which students can pursue laboratory research at Rowan University relevant to
neuroscience, Neuroscience majors will gain more understanding of relevant research questions and laboratory techniques,
gain familiarity with the scientific literature, and . Neuroscience B.S. students will be required to complete two total
semesters of this course and/or NEUR 01.480 Neuroscience Seminar, in whichever combination they choose.

END

Scientific Communication in Biomedical Sciences I

TBS 01105:

This is the first course in a sequence of two courses that introduces and provides an overview of scientific communication
within the field of translational biomedical sciences. Students will learn how to perform literature searches for both primary
and secondary biomedical research papers, critically read journal articles and understand the basic structure of research
manuscripts. This class focuses on the essential skills of scientific writing including abstracts, laboratory reports as well as
grant proposals.

END

Scientific Communication in Biomedical Sciences II

TBS 01110:

Prerequisites: BMS 01105 or TBS 01105 (may be taken concurrently)

This is the second course in a sequence of two courses that introduces and provides an overview of scientific
communication within the field of translational biomedical sciences. Students will learn how to perform literature searches
for both primary and secondary biomedical research papers, critically read journal articles and understand the basic structure
of research manuscripts. This class will introduce students to the essential skills needed to enter the biomedical work force
by learning how to prepare curriculum vitae.

END

Translational Biomedical Research I

TBS 01220:

Prerequisites: MCB 01102

This is the first course in a sequence of six courses providing meaningful research training for students majoring in
Translational Biomedical Science. Student research teams will work on current research problems in the biomedical field.
The specific research problem will be developed and assigned by a research advisor. Student participants will develop a
detailed knowledge of measurements techniques and limitations while also gaining an in-depth understanding of a current
research area in the biomedical field. Students will be required to complete a literature search and review. Communication
skills, both oral and written, will be emphasized.

END

Translational Biomedical Research II

TBS 01230:

Prerequisites: BMS 01220 or TBS 01220

This is the second course in a sequence of six courses providing meaningful research training for students majoring in
Translational Biomedical Science. Student research teams will work on current research problems in the biomedical advisor.
Student participants will develop a detailed knowledge of measurement techniques and limitations while also gaining an
in-depth understanding of a current research area in the biomedical field. Students will be required to complete a literature
search and review. Communications skills, both oral and written, will be emphasized.

END

Biomedical Technologies I

TBS 01315:

Prerequisites: MCB 01102 OR BIOL 01203

This course introduces and provides an overview of the instruments that are commonly found in the biomedical, life
science, and biophysical research fields. Students will learn about (1) which types of instruments exist, (2) the science behind
the measurements, (3) the nuts & bolts configuration of the instruments, and (4) the types of biomedical systems they can
best interrogate. The course utilizes primary scientific literature sources and includes observation and inspection of select
instruments. The goal of the course is to familiarize students with the interdisciplinary tools that they will need to be
successful in a career in biomedical research.

END

Translational Biomedical Research III

TBS 01320:

Prerequisites: BMS 01230 or TBS 01230

This is the third course in a sequence of six courses providing meaningful research training for students majoring in
Translational Biomedical Science. Student research teams will work on current research problems in the biomedical field.
The specific research problems will be determined in collaboration with a research advisor. Student participants will develop
a detailed knowledge of measurement techniques and limitations while also gaining a in-depth understanding of a current
research area in the biomedical field. Students will be required to compete a literature search and review and make
significant creative contributions influencing the direction of the research. Communication skills, both oral and written, will
be emphasized.

END

Translational Biomedical Research IV

TBS 01330:

Prerequisites: BMS 01320 or TBS 01320

This is the fourth course in a sequence of six courses providing meaningful research training for students majoring in
Translational Biomedical Science. Students research teams will work on current research problems in the biomedical field.
The specific research problem will be determined in collaboration with research advisor. Student participants will develop a
detailed knowledge of measurement techniques and limitations while also gaining an in-depth understanding of a current
research area in the biomedical field. Students will be required to complete a literature search and review and make
significant creative contributions influencing the direction of the research. Communication skills, both oral and written, will
be emphasized.

END

Biomedical Technologies II

TBS 01370:

Prerequisites: BMS 01315 or TBS 01315 or PHYS 00315

This course provides an overview of the types of instruments that students may encounter when conducting research in a
pre-clinical or hospital setting. The class primarily focuses on instruments that are used in diagnostic and therapeutic
applications of biomedical research ranging from small animals (e.g., mice) to humans. Students will learn about the theory
behind the instruments, their principle components, and how they are used to positively affect human lives. The course
utilizes primary scientific literature and addresses the material in an approachable and relatable manner. The goal of the
course is to familiarize students with the types of instruments that they will likely utilize in a career in translational and/or
clinical biomedical research.

END

Translational Biomedical Research V

TBS 01420:

Prerequisites: BMS 01330 or TBS 01330

This is the fifth course in a sequence of six courses providing meaningful research training for students majoring in
Translational Biomedical Science. Student research teams will work on current research problems in the biomedical field.
The specific research problem will be determined in collaboration with a research advisor. Student participants will develop
a detailed knowledge of measurement techniques and limitations while also gaining an in-depth understanding of a current
research area in the biomedical field. Students will be required to complete a literature search and review and perform
independent research with faculty mentors providing feedback and redirection. Communications skills, both oral and
written, will be emphasized.

END

TBS 01430:

Prerequisites: BMS 01420 or TBS 01420

Translational Biomedical Research VI

END

Biomedical Frontiers Seminar I

TBS 01450:

Prerequisites: Senior Standing

This is a Fall semester capstone course that integrates current scientific research in the field of biomedical sciences
performed by faculty members of the Biomedical & Translational Science department. This course is designed to promote
the students’ understanding of the role of different disciplines of science in the study of biomedical paradigms and models.
Students will obtain insight of how fundamental science contributes to emerging research and discoveries in the field of
biomedical sciences.

END

Biomedical Frontiers Seminar II

TBS 01451:

Prerequisites: Senior Standing

This is a Spring semester capstone course that integrates current scientific research in the field of biomedical sciences
performed by faculty members of the Biomedical & Translational Science department. This course is designed to promote
the students’ understanding of the role of different disciplines of science in the study of biomedical paradigms and models.
Students will obtain insight of how fundamental science contributes to emerging research and discoveries in the field of
biomedical sciences.

END

Allied Health Introduction To Health Care Professions I

AH 10101:

This is the first course in a 4 course seminar sequence in the pre-nursing licensure program. This course provides a
comprehensive overview of the most current trends and issues occurring in nursing and health care. It is about the exciting
evolution of nursing: its very visible public image and its core foundations, which include nursing theory, nursing education,
and licensure and certification. This course will serve as a valuable resource for the entry-level nurse.

END

Allied Health Introduction To Health Care Professions II

AH 10102:

Prerequisites: AH 10101

This is the second course in a 4 course seminar sequence in the pre-nursing licensure program. This course provides a
comprehensive overview of the most current trends and issues occurring in nursing and health care including health care
economics, the evolution of the health care system, health care policy and politics, and legal and ethical issues. This course
will serve as a valuable resource for the entry-level nurse.

END

Allied Health Introduction To Health Care Professions III

AH 10103:

Prerequisites: AH 10101 and AH 10102

This is the third course in a 4 course seminar sequence in the pre-nursing licensure program. This course provides a
comprehensive overview of the most current trends and issues occurring in nursing and health care, with a focus on the basic
skills that are necessary for nurses to function effectively in the professional nursing role. Topics include leadership role and
management theory, effective communication, nursing care delivery models and the role of nursing research and evidence
base practice. This course will serve as a valuable resource for the entry-level nurse.

END

Allied Health Introduction To Health Care Professions IV

AH 10104:

Prerequisites: AH 10101 and AH 10102 andAH 10103

This course is the fourth and final course of a 4 course seminar sequence in the pre-nursing licensure program. This course
provides a comprehensive overview of the most current trends and issues occurring in nursing and health care, preparing the
student to embark on a career in the field of nursing. Topics include the transition process from student to professional
nurse, contemporary nursing roles and career opportunities, time management and the NCLEX exam. This course will serve
as an excellent base for novice students as they build their career into professional nursing.

END

BME 00390:

Special Topics in Biomedical Engineering

Prerequisites: Determined by the topic associated with the selected topic.

This course is designed to introduce students to emerging topics in biomedical engineering. pre-reqs are determined
by the nature of the topic.

END

Biomedical Engineering Seminar

BME 11100:

This course introduces students to emerging areas of biomedical engineering research and industry through a series of
seminars. The course may be taken multiple times; the content will change with each offering to represent cutting-edge
work in biomedical engineering.

END

BME 11101:

This introductory seminar will introduce first year students to the field of Biomedical Engineering, provide strategies for
academic success, and begin preparing students for careers in BME.

BME First Year Seminar

END

Chemical Foundations in Biomedical Engineering

BME 11201:

Prerequisites: PHYS 02220 Minimum Grade of C-and MATH 01131 Minimum Grade of C-

This course is an introduction to conservation principles and the chemical foundations of biomedical engineering. It will
cover the basics of conservation principles, specifically those of mass, energy, and momentum. The course will also include
an introduction to chemical processes in these areas, particularly those that are important in physiological systems such as
diffusion and heat transfer.

END

Special Topics in Biomedical Engineering

BME 11290:

This course provides timely coverage of specific topics in Biomedical Engineering, and it is intended for sophomore-level
Biomedical Engineering students. Special topics courses may be traditional classroom-based courses as well as
research-related courses supervised by specific advisors. This class may be taken multiple times when offered with a
different special topics content.

END

Physiological Foundations in Biomedical Engineering

BME 11301:

Prerequisites: MCB 01102, MATH 01235 both C- or better

This course is an introduction to human physiology from an engineering perspective. Topics covered are related to
physiological systems, including the cardiovascular and nervous systems, computational models of these systems, and
engineered solutions to damage and disease. The laboratory component will include hands-on training in physiological
measurements and interpretation.

END

Electrical Foundations in Biomedical Engineering

BME 11302:

Prerequisites: PHYS 02222, MATH 01235 both C- or better

This course is an introduction to the electrical foundations of biomedical engineering. Topics will include the
identification and connection of basic circuit elements, and the prediction of dynamic responses of circuits. Identification
and analysis of physiological and biological analogs of electrical systems using these foundational principles will also be
covered.

END

Mechanical Foundations in Biomedical Engineering

BME 11303:

Prerequisites: PHYS 02220, MATH 01235 both C- or better

This course is an introduction to the mechanical foundations of biomedical engineering. It will cover the basics of statics
and kinematics in the context of solid and fluid mechanics, particularly those that are important in physiological systems.

END

Advanced Topics in Biomedical Engineering

BME 11390:

This course provides timely coverage of specific advanced topics in Biomedical Engineering, and it is intended for
junior-level Biomedical Engineering students. Special topics courses may be traditional classroom-based courses as well as
research-related courses supervised by specific advisors. This class may be taken multiple times when offered with a
different special topics content.

END

Simulation, Modeling, and Control in Biomedical Systems

BME 11411:

Prerequisites: BME 11301 and (CS 01104 or CS 04103)

This course provides an introduction to simulation, modeling, and control in biomedical systems. Topics include: kinetic
modeling of molecular systems, PBPK modeling, LABVIEW-based simulations, MATLAB modeling, control system
architecture and analysis, and an introduction to current models in the literature.

END

Biocompatibility and Immunoengineering

BME 11450:

Prerequisites: BME 11301 with minimum grade of C-

This course covers topics in biocompatibility and the body's response to foreign materials, with an emphasis on material
properties and the cell and molecular biology of the immune system. The course introduces the various signaling
mechanisms used by cells when presented with foreign and engineered antigens, and then applies engineering principles to
the discovery and design of novel biomaterials and therapeutics that are biocompatible.

END

Mechanobiology

BME 11451:

Prerequisites: MCB 01102 with minimum grade of C- AND BME 11303 with minimum grade of C-

This course will provide students with a thorough understanding of how mechanics dictate cell function and how this
knowledge can be applied to the prevention and treatment of disease. Students will learn how mammalian cells interact with
the complex 3D environment that surrounds them in tissues including how cellular behavior is affected by the extracellular
matrix. The course also addresses the specific cell response to mechanical stimuli and how this can be used in tissue
engineering and regenerative medicine applications. Additional topics include: extracellular matrix structure and function,
cell-matrix interactions and cell signaling, mechanics of the extracellular matrix, and mechanotransduction.

END

Cell Bioelectricity

BME 11452:

Prerequisites: BME 11302 with minimum grade of C-

The objective of this course is to develop quantitative and qualitative understanding of the generation and transmission of
bioelectricity in and between excitable cells. Topics include: circuit analysis and modeling of potentials and currents across
the cellular membrane, action potentials, propagation of potentials along the cellular membrane, and electrical stimulation
of excitable tissue.

END

Regulatory Practices in Biomedical Engineering

BME 11453:

Prerequisites: BME 11302 with minimum grade of C- AND ENGR 01303

This course is an introduction to domestic and foreign regulatory practices associated with biomedical devices and/or
products. It will cover the basics of the processes and protocols used by the FDA in order to better prepare students to be
significant contributors to the development of a biomedical product that meets or exceeds all the applicable standards,
regulations, and laws that apply to its applicable technology.

END

Introduction to Stem Cell Engineering

BME 11454:

Prerequisites: Senior-level standing in majors 0911, 0915, or 0916 (Biomedical Engineering), or by instructor permission from
instructor.

Although stem cells can differentiate into numerous cell types, their therapeutic potential is limited by the inability to
reliably control stem cell behavior outside of the body. To increase the clinical use of stem cells, it is important to
understand how stem cells interpret extracellular signals and to use this information to design materials that control stem
cell behavior in vitro and in vivo. This course will cover stem cell biology, mechanobiology, and techniques to engineer
materials with biochemical and biophysical signals that regulate stem cell growth and differentiation.

END

Introduction to Synthetic Biology

BME 11455:

Prerequisites: Senior Standing and Enrolled in BS Biomedical Engineering or Instructor's permission

Synthetic biology integrates many scientific disciplines with the goal to rapidly and reliably reprogram or design new
biological systems. It has applications in a wide range of areas including manufacturing, biosensors, therapeutics, and even
synthetic life. This course provides an introduction into techniques and real-world applications of synthetic biology by
primarily focusing on current research in the field. Topics include: cell free systems, biomanufacturing, CRISPR, plant syn
bio, mammalian syn bio, therapeutic applications, safety mechanisms, and ethics.

END

Principles of Nanoparticle Design and Engineering

BME 11456:

Prerequisites: Senior standing and enrollment in BS Biomedical Engineering or Instructor's permission

This course will provide students with an introduction to the need for nanoparticle technologies for drug delivery to treat
diseases and their benefits over freely delivered therapeutics. Students will learn how to apply engineering principles to the
development and design of nanotechnology for drug delivery. This course also addresses how nanoparticle technologies
interact with biological systems and how they can be targeted to specific tissues to maximize delivery and therapeutic
efficiency. Additional topics include: disease applications, bioconjugation strategies, in vitro and in vivo experimental
techniques to study drug delivery, nanoparticle characterization, nanoparticle synthesis, and the clinical implementation of
nanoparticle technologies.

END

Biophysics Phenomena in Biomaterials Science

BME 11468:

Prerequisites: BME 11303

This course is aimed at applying material physics and technology to regulate and support biological systems and functions.
A goal of the course is to fundamentally understand variable biomaterials and their interactions with biological systems
(cells, tissues, organs). A second goal is to use material physics and technology as a tool to understand biomaterials for
artificial tissues and organs, or biophysical devices and sensors. Finally, students will learn and understand public healthcare
policies, needs, and resources.

END

Introduction to Biomechanics

BME 11470:

Prerequisites: BME 11303

This course presents an introduction to biomechanics of human motion. The course will encompass the use of engineering
principles to describe, analyze and assess human movement. Topics will include kinematics, kinetics, anthropometry applied
to the synthesis of human movement and muscle mechanics.

END

Principles of Biomedical Control Systems

BME 11471:

Prerequisites: BME 11411 or CHE 06405

This course focuses on the identification and study of biomedical control systems. Students will learn to identify
components of physiological control systems and examine the origin of diseases at a systems level. Additional topics include
the incorporation of artificial organs into existing physiological control systems, mathematical modeling of biological
processes, and designing therapeutic strategies.

END

Principles of Biomedical Processes

BME 11472:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06101 and MCB 01102

This course introduces students to engineering fundamentals applied to biomedical systems, particularly chemical
engineering fundamentals. Students analyze and design biomedical processes. The basic biochemistry and physiology
required for understanding of biomedical systems is presented. Basic principles of mass transfer, heat transfer, fluid flow,
and chemical reaction are used to analyze or design drug delivery systems, pharmacokinetic models, the circulatory system,
transport across cell membranes, and human and artificial organs. Laboratory experiments and demonstrations will be
integrated throughout the course.

END

Principles of Biomaterials Engineering

BME 11473:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06100

The goal of studying biomaterials is to understand how the body’s natural tissues are organized on a compositional,
structural, and properties basis. We also seek to understand how the body recognizes and responds to foreign materials, and
to combine this knowledge in order to successfully design implants that can be used to treat debilitating diseases.

END

Fundamentals of Controlled Release

BME 11474:

Prerequisites: MATH 01235 and CHEM 06100

Controlled systems are designed to provide delivery of an agent at a pre-determined rate for an extended period of time.
Controlled release offers several advantages over traditional methods of formulation and administration: maintenance of
effective concentrations for a sustained period, less total agent required, cost effectiveness, convenience and compliance.
This course introduces students to engineering fundamentals applied to controlled release systems. Basic principles of
materials, mass transfer, heat transfer, fluid flow and chemical reactions are used to analyze and design controlled release
systems. Applications to pharmaceutical, agricultural, and food industries will be explored. Laboratory experiments and
demonstrations will be integrated throughout the course.

END

Principles of Engineering Exercise Physiology

BME 11475:

Prerequisites: MATH 01235 and CHEM 06100

This course introduces students to engineering fundamentals applied to physiologic systems, primarily during exercise.
The basic biochemistry and physiology required for understanding these systems is presented. Basic principles of mass
transfer, heat transfer, fluid flow, thermodynamics, and chemical reaction are used to analyze the human metabolic system,
respiratory system, cardiovascular system, and thermal system. The interrelationships of these systems will be investigated,
and their dynamic response to exercise will be studied. Laboratory experiments will be conducted throughout the course.

END

Introduction to Biotransport

BME 11476:

Prerequisites: MATH 01235 and BME 11303

This course introduces biotransport in terms of heat transfer, mass transfer, and fluid mechanics related to the human
body. Beginning with biotransport problem formulation, the course explores software tools that enable mathematical
modeling. Fundamental principles of model validation, mesh convergence, sensitivity analysis, and objective functions are
presented. Several modeling labs are used to build software skill and explore various heat and mass transfer processes inside
and around the human body. Medical device development concepts are presented, making a connection between modeling
activities and product development. The final weeks of this class are dedicated to a final project on a student-selected topic.

END

Introduction to Biomaterial Mechanics

BME 11477:

Prerequisites: BME 11303

The goal of this course is to present an introduction to the numerous issues that factor into the choice of material selection
for biomedical devices. Issues to be examined include mechanical properties, biocompatibility, production costs, and ease of
manufacture. This course will familiarize students with relevant material issues and highlight the process for matching
material performance with the desired design characteristics and functionality.

END

Tissue Engineering Fundamentals

BME 11478:

Prerequisites: MCB 01102 or BIOL 01203

Tissue engineering is an expanding field that integrates principles of biology and engineering for the development of tissue
substitutes and artificial organs. This course, which utilizes a combined lecture-laboratory approach, will review embryology,
cell culture techniques, stem cell biology, cell signaling, cell development and differentiation, biocompatibility, tissue
organization and function, biomaterial synthesis/characterization, and structure-function relationships in tissue engineering
scaffolds.

END

Instrumentation for Biomedical Sciences

BME 11479:

Prerequisites: BME 11302

The design and use of advanced instrumentation are critical in all areas of the biomedical sciences for analysis of
biomedical systems and for synthesis of new biomedical technologies. This course will familiarize students with a wide range
of the instrumentation they are likely to encounter in a biomedical career. Various instruments will be examined with
respect to: (1) Theoretical basis of the measurement or synthesis and relation to instrumentational architecture, (2)
Implementation of the method and experimental design, and (3) Data interpretation and analysis. The course will integrate
primary scientific literature and discuss the evolution of instrumentation with new technologies and/or applications. The
course will include inspection of instruments and observation of experimental execution, providing students with
experience over a broad range of modern biomedical instrumentation.

END

Topics in Biomedical Engineering

BME 11480:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

This course covers topics in Biomedical Engineering. Specific topics and pre-reqs are determined by the nature of the
course when it is announced.

END

Emerging Topics in Stem Cell Engineering

BME 11481:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

This course covers topics in Stem Cell Engineering. Specific topics and pre-reqs are determined by the nature of the
course when it is announced.

END

Emerging Topics in Tissue Engineering

BME 11482:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

This course covers topics in Tissue Engineering. Specific topics and pre-reqs are determined by the nature of the
course when it is announced.

END

Emerging Topics in Regenerative Medicine

BME 11483:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

This course covers topics in Regenerative Medicine. Specific topics and pre-reqs are determined by the nature of the
course when it is announced.

END

Emerging Topics in Cellular Engineering

BME 11484:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

This course covers topics in Cellular Engineering. Specific topics and pre-reqs are determined by the nature of the
course when it is announced.

END

Emerging Topics in Biomaterials Engineering

BME 11485:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

This course covers topics in Biomaterials Engineering. Specific topics and pre-reqs are determined by the nature of
the course when it is announced.

END

Emerging Topics in Biomechanics

BME 11486:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

This course covers topics in Biomechanics. Specific topics and pre-reqs are determined by the nature of the course
when it is announced.

END

Emerging Topics in Orthopedic Engineering

BME 11487:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

This course covers topics in Orthopedic Engineering. Specific topics and pre-reqs are determined by the nature of the
course when it is announced.

END

Emerging Topics in Pharmaceutical Engineering

BME 11488:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

This course covers topics in Pharmaceutical Engineering. Specific topics and pre-reqs are determined by the nature of
the course when it is announced.

END

Emerging Topics in Therapeutic Delivery

BME 11489:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

This course covers topics in Therapeutic Delivery. Specific topics and pre-reqs are determined by the nature of the
course when it is announced.

END

Emerging Topics in Biomedical Engineering

BME 11490:

Prerequisites: Senior Status and admissions to Biomedical Engineering or Permission from Instructor

This course provides timely coverage of specific emerging topics in Biomedical Engineering, and it is intended for
advanced undergraduate students. Special topics courses may be traditional classroom-based courses as well as
research-related courses supervised by specific advisors. This class may be taken multiple times when offered with a
different special topics content.

END

Advanced Stem Cell Engineering

BME 11554:

Prerequisites: Must have Graduate standing or fully executed Senior Privilege Paperwork

Although stem cells can differentiate into numerous cell types, their therapeutic potential is limited by the inability to
reliably control stem cell behavior outside of the body. To increase the clinical use of stem cells, it is important to
understand how stem cells interpret extracellular signals and to use this information to design materials that control stem
cell behavior in vitro and in vivo. This course will cover stem cell biology, mechanobiology, and techniques to engineer
materials with biochemical and biophysical signals that regulate stem cell growth and differentiation.

END

Fundamentals of Synthetic Biology

BME 11555:

Prerequisites: Must have Graduate standing or fully executed Senior Privilege Paperwork

Synthetic biology integrates many scientific disciplines with the goal to rapidly and reliably reprogram or design new
biological systems. It has applications in a wide range of areas including manufacturing, biosensors, therapeutics, and even
synthetic life. This course provides in-depth coverage of techniques and real-world applications of synthetic biology through
analysis of current primary literature in the field. Topics include: cell free systems, biomanufacturing, CRISPR, plant syn
bio, mammalian syn bio, therapeutic applications, safety mechanisms, and ethics.

END

Advanced Nanoparticle Design and Engineering

BME 11556:

Prerequisites: Must have Graduate standing or fully executed Senior Privilege Paperwork

This course will provide students with an introduction to the need for nanoparticle technologies for drug delivery to treat
diseases and their benefits over freely delivered therapeutics. Students will learn how to apply engineering principles to the
development and design of nanotechnology for drug delivery. This course also addresses how nanoparticle technologies
interact with biological systems and how they can be targeted to specific tissues to maximize delivery and therapeutic
efficiency. Additional topics include: disease applications, bioconjugation strategies, in vitro and in vivo experimental
techniques to study drug delivery, nanoparticle characterization, nanoparticle synthesis, and the clinical implementation of
nanoparticle technologies. The graduate level course will also include implementation of the course material via projects and
presentations spanning project development thorough clinical translation.

END

Advanced Topics in Biomedical Instrumentation

BME 11561:

Prerequisites: Graduate student status or Instructor permission

This course provides an in-depth examination of the types of instruments that students may encounter when conducting
research in a pre-clinical or hospital setting. The class primarily focuses on instruments that are used in diagnostic and
therapeutic applications of biomedical research ranging from small animals (e.g., mice) to humans. Some examples include
ultrasound, x-ray, nuclear, and magnetic resonance imaging methods, as well as combined platforms and therapeutic
approaches. Students will learn about the theory behind the instruments, their principle components and operations, and
how they are used to positively affect human lives. The course utilizes primary scientific literature, and students will be
expected to contribute towards a publishable review article on a given instrument or technique. The goal of the course is for
students to develop a proficient knowledge of the diverse types of instrumentation that they will likely utilize in a career in
translational biomedical engineering and science research.

END

Advanced Topics in Controlled Release

BME 11574:

Prerequisites: Must have Graduate standing or fully executed Senior Privilege Paperwork

Controlled release systems are designed to provide delivery of an agent at a pre-determined rate for an extended period of
item. Controlled release offers several advantages over traditional methods of formulation and administration: maintenance
of effective concentrations for a sustained period, less total agent required, cost effectiveness, convenience and compliance.
This course introduces students to engineering fundamentals applied to controlled release systems. Basic principles of
materials, mass transfer, heat transfer, fluid flow and chemical reactions are used to analyze and design controlled release
systems. Applications to pharmaceutical, agricultural, and food industries will be explored. Laboratory experiments and
demonstrations will be integrated throughout the course.

END

Principles Of Chemical Processes I

CHE 06201:

Prerequisites: (MATH 01131 minimum grade of C- and PHYS002200 minimum Grade of C- and CHEM 06101 minimum grade of C-

This course presents an introduction to chemical engineering calculations; processes, process variables, and design.
Material balances for chemically non-reacting and reacting systems are described. Single-phase and multi-phase systems;
property tables and diagrams are reviewed. Demonstrations may be integrated throughout the course.

END

Principles Of Chemical Processes II

CHE 06202:

Prerequisites: CHE 06201 minimum grade of C- and CHEM 06101

This course is a continuation of Principles of Chemical Processes I. It will describe energy concepts for chemical
processes. This course presents energy balances for chemically non-reacting and reacting systems and will show students
how to use property tables and diagrams. Computer-aided material and energy balance calculations will be performed.
Transient material and energy balances will be introduced. Demonstrations may be integrated throughout the course.

END

Principles of Chemical Processes

CHE 06203:

Prerequisites: MATH 01131 minimum grade of C- and PHYS00220 minimum grade of C- and CHEM 06101 minimum grade of C

This course presents an introduction to chemical engineering calculations; processes, process variables, and design.
Material balances for chemically non-reacting and reacting systems are described. Single-phase and multi-phase systems;
property tables and diagrams are reviewed. The course also includes energy concepts for chemical processes. It presents
energy balances for chemically non-reacting and reacting systems and shows students how to use property tables and
diagrams. Computer-aided material and energy balance calculations are performed. Demonstrations may be integrated
throughout the course.

END

Chemical Engineering Fluid Mechanics

CHE 06241:

Prerequesited: MATH 01230, Minimum Grade of C- ANDPHYS 00220, Minimum Grade of C- AND (CHE 0620,Minimum Grade
of C- OR CHE 06203, Minimum Grade of C-).
The subject of this course is in the area of general fluid flow with an emphasis on fluid flow in pipe systems. Topics covered
in the area of general fluid flow include hydrostatics, mechanical energy balances, macroscopic momentum balances, and
dimensionless groups. Topics covered in the area of pipe flow include incompressible flow, turbulence, viscous flows with an
emphasis on quantifying frictional losses. The course includes appropriate laboratory experiments and computer
applications.

END

Principles Of Chemical Processes II

CHE 06302:

Prerequisites: CHE 06106 AND Grade of C- or better in CHE 06201

This course is a continuation of Principles of Chemical Processes I. It will describe energy concepts for chemical
processes. This course presents energy balances for chemically non-reacting and reacting systems and will show students
how to use property tables and diagrams. Computer-aided material and energy balance calculations will be performed.
Transient material and energy balances will be introduced. Demonstrations may be integrated throughout course.

END

Process Fluid Transport

CHE 06309:

Prerequisites: MATH 01235 and (ENGR 01341 minimum grade of C- or ENGR 01342 minimum grade of C- or CHE06241
minimum grade of C- ) and (CHE 06202 miminum gradeof C- OR CHE 06203 minimum grade of C- ).

The course will introduce students to topics in fluid and momentum transport related to chemical processes. Students will
investigate the fundamental and design topics of momentum and fluid transport beyond those covered in Fluid Mechanics I.
The topics area will be applied to various chemical processing applications. Topics will include Newtonian and
non-Newtonian fluid behavior, two-phase flow, flow through beds of solids, pumping of liquids and gases, and mixing.

END

Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics I

CHE 06310:

Prerequisites: CHE 06202 minimum grade of C- orCHE 06203 minimum grade of C- and MATH 01235 minimum grade of C-

This course provides a foundation in engineering thermodynamic principles. The course includes an overview of basic
thermodynamic principles, heat effects, the Second Law of Thermodynamics., and thermodynamic properties of fluids and
flow processes. The course will also include solution thermodynamics theory and application, phase equilibria, chemical
reaction equilibria, power and refrigeration cycles, liquefaction and thermodynamic analysis of processes. The course will
focus on the synthesis and solution of complex problems in a team project-oriented environment.

END

Heat Transfer Processes

CHE 06311:

Prerequisites: (ENGR 01341 minimum grade of C- orENGR 01342 minimum grade of C- or CHE 06241 minimumgrade of C- ) and
(CHE 06202 minimum grade of C- orCHE 06203 minimum grade of C- )

This course introduces the fundamental modes of heat transfer that include conduction, convection (forced and natural)
and radiation. It presents the mathematical analysis and computation of steady and unsteady state heat transfer for
microscopic and macroscopic systems such as the design of heat exchangers. Demonstrations and laboratories will be
integrated throughout the course.

END

Separation Processes I

CHE 06312:

Prerequisites: MATH 01230 minimum grade of C- and (ENGR 01341 minimum grade of C- or ENGR 01342 minimum grade of C-) or
CHE 06241 minimum grade of C- )and (CHE 06202 minimum grade of C- or CHE 06203minimum grade of C- ).

This course describes modes of diffusion of mass and chemical composition. This course includes mass transfer analysis;
molecular diffusion in gases, liquids, and solids and convective mass transfer. It will have an introduction to
extraction/leaching operations.

END

Separation Processes II

CHE 06314:

Prerequisites: CHE 06309 and CHE 06312, (minimum grade of C-), and CHE 06310

This course is the second course of a two semester sequence in mass transfer and separation processes. The course presents
several separation processes and their relevant theory, design and applications for gas, liquid and solid separation in both
traditional and emerging industries. These processes include distillation; adsorption and chromatography; membrane
separations, reverse osmosis and gas permeation; and solid liquid separations; centrifugation, particle filtration,
crystallization. Demonstrations, laboratories and computer simulations may be integrated throughout this course.

END

Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics II

CHE 06315:

Prerequisites: CHE 06310 minimum grade of C-

This course is a direct continuation of Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics I. This course includes an in-depth view of
mulitcomponent systems, phase equilibria such as liquid-liquid and solid-liquid equilibria, simultaneous chemical reactions
equilibria, and electrolyte equilibria. The course will also cover chemical engineering thermodynamics applications in
emerging technologies such as the biochemical and biomedical fields.

END

Chemical Reaction Engineering

CHE 06316:

Prerequisites: CHE 06309 and CHE 06310 and CHE 06311 and CHE 06312 and CHEM 07200

This course describes various topics related to homogeneous and heterogeneous reaction kinetics, idealized reactor models
for batch and flow systems, corrections for non-ideal residence times, and heat and mass transfer effects. An introduction
will be made to homogeneous and heterogeneous catalytic processes and industrial catalytic reactors. Demonstrations and
laboratory exercises will be integrated into the course.

END

CHEMICAL ENGINEERING MATERIALS

CHE 06381:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06101CHEMISTRY II.

This course develops the material structure and property relations. Atomic bonding, lattice structures, crystalline and
polymeric structures and properties, imperfections, dislocations, phase diagrams, and quantitative analysis are presented.
Properties of metals and alloys, ceramics, polymers, composited, and electrical materials are discussed.

END

Chemical Engineering Modeling

CHE 06385:

Prerequisites: CHE 06241 AND CHE 06202

This course will introduce students to the modeling of chemical processes using practical simulation tools; the same ones
used in industry. Students will learn to build models of complex chemical processes, evaluate the accuracy of models, and use
models for process optimization and design decisions.

END

Chemical Process Component Design

CHE 06401:

Prerequisites: CHE 06315 and CHE 06314 and (CHE 06316 with minimum grade of C-)

This course addresses the problems in economic design of chemical process components used in the synthesis of overall
chemical processes. Economic aspects of engineering, including evaluating alternative course of action, cost factors, and
process optimization are presented. Safety and environmental considerations in process selection will be discussed.

END

Transport Phenomena

CHE 06402:

Prerequisites: CHE 06314 and CHE 06316

This course describes analogies among heat, mass, and momentum transfer. Governing differential equations are presented
and their uses in steady-state and unsteady-state systems. This course reviews applications to mass transfer coupled with
heat transfer and/or chemical reaction. Numerical methods and computer applications are included.

END

Unit Operations Experimental Design And Analysis

CHE 06403:

Prerequisites: CHE 06315 and CHE 06314 and CHE 06316

This course addresses the fundamental operation and applications of chemical engineering unit processes, generally
referred to as unit operations. Students will learn and develop experimental designs and engage in the data analysis required
to characterize the operations and relate theory to industrial practice. Students will engege in pilot-scale process
experimentation based on appropriate experimental designs and analysis. Typical processes covered include process
filtration, tubular flow reactors, liquid-liquid extraction, fluidized beds, continuous crystallization, leaching, reverse osmosis,
gas permeation, absorption and stripping, and bioprocesses.

END

Unit Operations Laboratory II

CHE 06404:

Prerequisites: CHE 06.403

This course is a direct continuation of Unit Operations Laboratory I, examining a different series of unit operations but
with similar goals and expectations. Students will again engage in pilot-scale process experimentation on various systems and
relate theory and phenomenological principles to performance of a realistic industrial operation.

END

CHE 06405:

Process Dynamics And Control

Prerequisites: CHE 06314 and CHE 06315and CHE 06316

This course provides an introduction to the dynamics, modeling and control of process systems. Topics studied will
include: modeling analysis and application to control systems, dynamic behavior of processes, control objectives and
benefits. Various aspects of feedback control will be emphasized: feedback loop, PID algorithm, tuning, performance, and
applications. Enhancements to single-loop PID control; cascade control, and feed-forward control will be discussed along
with special topics. Process control design case studies will be included.

END

CHE 06406:

Chemical Plant Design

Prerequisites: CHE 06405 and (CHE 06401 with a minimum grade of C-)

This course will focus in design strategy for process synthesis and analysis and economic decision making in the process
design. The course explores the development of reactors, compressors, separators and heat exchangers. Cost diagrams and
quick screening of process alternatives are utilized. The course will use computer-aided process design software for
industrial cases.

END

Chemical Process Safety

CHE 06407:

Prerequisites: CHE 06241 AND CHE 06315 AND CHE 06316

This course presents the basic principles, guidelines, and calculations necessary for the safe design and operation of
chemical plants and related manufacturing facilities. Topics include: Safety and Environmental Laws and regulation,
Toxicology, Chemical Hygiene, Chemical Releases, Dispersion of Chemical Releases, Fires and Explosion and their
Prevention, Reactive Hazards, Hazard Identification, and Risk Assessment. Case histories of safety and environmental
incidents are analyzed.

END

Applications of Experimental Methods in Chemical Engineering

CHE 06430:

Prerequisites: (CHE 06315 and CHE 06316) or (BME 11201 and BME 11303) or ME 10322 or CEE 08305

Hands-on experience with experimental techniques and computer aided methods for materials characterization and
solutions to contemporary research problems in Chemical Engineering as well as in a variety of other engineering disciplines.
Modular course including experimentations such as, but not limited to, TGA, DSC, DMA, and Rheology and Rheology
computer-aided software packages such as ASPEN, GAMS, COMSOL, MATLAB and ImageJ.

END

Process Safety

CHE 06441:

Prerequisites: CHE 06241 and CHE 06315 and CHEM 06316

This course presents the basic principles, guidelines, and calculations necessary for the safe design and operation of
chemical plants and related manufacturing facilities. Topics include: toxics and human exposure, fires and explosions, vessel
relief systems, hazard identification and risk assessment, source and dispersion models. Accident investigation is discussed
along with a review of actual case histories.

END

Fluid Flow In Processing And Manufacturing

CHE 06442:

This course surveys fluid flow applications in the processing and manufacturing industries. It presents advanced flow
concepts; multiphase flow, complex flow, and turbulence. Gas-solid fluidized bed technology and design. This course will
analyze liquid-liquid and liquid-solid mixing systems.

END

CHE 06445:

Process Control Design and Practice

Prerequisites: CHE 06314 AND CHE 06315 AND CHE 06316

Manufacturing facilities in the Process Industries are highly automated to meet modern efficiency, quality, safety, and
environmental goals. This course teaches how sensors, valves, pumps, and computing devices are combined to control the
unit operations studied in pre-req courses. Students will learn to design batch and continuous processes capable of
automated startup, operation and shutdown. Quality, safety, and environmental goals will translate to discrete and
continuous constraints in automated process design. Students will learn to document process control and automation in
Piping and Instrumentation Diagrams and Functional Specifications. The challenges of operator interaction with
automated systems will be featured.

END

Principles of Pharmaceutical & Personal Care Product Engineering

CHE 06450:

Prerequisites: CHE 06202

Principles of Pharmaceutical and Personal Care Products Engineering, CHE 06.450 Fundamental concepts covered
include dosage types and personal care product/drug development time-line. Introduction to manufacturing environment of
the sector is examined, including regulatory, design, and operational aspects.

END

Pharmaceutical & Personal Care Product Manufacturing Processes

CHE 06451:

Prerequisites: CHE 06309 AND CHE 06312 AND CHE 06310 AND CHE 06316

Pharmaceutical and Personal Care Products Manufacturing Processes, CHE 06.451 Basic manufacturing concepts such as
small vs. large molecule synthesis, process scale-up, formulation techniques; unit processes used in both API synthesis and
finished product formulation; single and multiphase mixing and reaction processes; solid/liquid separations via
crystallization, filtration and drying; and milling, granulation, and other solids processing operations.

END

Bioprocess Engineering

CHE 06462:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06100 and MATH 01130 or CHEM 06105 and MATH 01130

This course reviews the fundamentals and engineering of bioprocess engineering with emphasis on applying biotechnology
to industrial processes. Essential aspects of biochemistry, microbiology and kinetics are presented. This course discusses
bioreactor engineering, and recovery and purification processes. Processing applications of engineering kinetics and enzyme
technology are included. Laboratory experiments and demonstrations will be integrated throughout the course.

END

Green Engineering Of Chemical Processes

CHE 06463:

Prerequisites: CHE 06314 and CHE 06316

This course evaluates process design techniques to minimize waste and by-products in the processing and manufacturing
industries. Topics include: mass and heat recycling processes; technologies for process stream renovation, material reuse and
recycling methods. Case studies of industrial applications are utilized.

END

Advanced Separation Technology

CHE 06464:

This course describes advanced separation processes not previously covered in Transfer Processes II and Separation
Processes courses. Topics include: crystallization and precipitation; adsorption, chromatography and ion exchange; reverse
osmosis, ultrafiltration, gas permeation and prevaporation. Commercial system design parameters and laboratory
demonstrations will be included. An overview of other novel separation processes will be done.

END

Advanced Design Of Reactors

CHE 06465:

This course presents an overview of chemical reaction types and ideal reactors. Topics presented include: catalysis and
catalytic reactors; analogies for real reactors; fluid flow and heat and mass transfer effects on chemical reactions and reactor
design; numerical analyses and simulation of reacting systems; applications in the chemical industry.

END

Polymer Processing

CHE 06466:

Prerequisites: CHE 06381 and CHE 06310

The course provides an introduction to the various aspects of polymer engineering starting with basic polymer properties,
structure and function. The major topics covered are the formation of polymer systems and manufacturing techniques.
Fabrication processes topics include coating, extrusion, and foams. The production of thin-films and membranes will focus
on stretching, phase inversion, and hollow fiber spinning. Students will study application of polymeric materials engineering
to various industries.

END

Principles Of Electrochemical Engineering

CHE 06468:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06100 or CHEM 06105

This course will focus on the fundamental principles of process electrochemistry. Basic principles of thermodynamics,
kinetics and mass transfer as applied to electrochemical systems will be presented. Modeling of electrochemical systems and
application of electrochemical principles to corroding systems will be conducted by the students. Engineering case studies
of commercial applications in energy conversion and storage and electrolytic processes will be presented.

END

Principles Of Air Pollution Control

CHE 06470:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06100 or CHEM 06105

This course introduces students to air pollution control theory. Students design air pollution control processes and specify
equipment related to the control of particulate, gaseous and toxic air emissions. The chemistry required for pollution
control process design is presented. The environmental impacts due both to controlling and not controlling emissions are
considered. Students design control equipment, specify and troubleshoot control systems and predict the impacts for each
major type of control system.

END

Principles of Biomedical Control Systems

CHE 06471:

Prerequisites: CHE 06405

This course is an extension of Process Dynamics and Control (CHE 06405) focusing on the identification and study of
biomedical control systems. Students will learn to identify components of physiological control systems and examine the
origin of diseases at a systems level. Additional topics include the incorporation of artificial organs into existing
physiological control systems, mathematical modeling of biological processes, and designing therapeutic strategies.

END

Principles Of Biomedical Processes

CHE 06472:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06100 or CHEM 06105

This course introduces students to chemical engineering fundamentals applied to biomedical systems. Students analyze
and design biomedical processes. The basic biochemistry and physiology required for understanding of biomedical systems
is presented. Basic principles of mass transfer, heat transfer, fluid flow, and chemical reaction are used to analyze or design
drug delivery systems, pharmacokinetic models, the circulatory system, transport across cell membranes, and human and
artificial organs. Laboratory experiments and demonstrations will be integrated throughout the course.

END

Principles of Biomaterials Engineering

CHE 06473:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06100 or CHEM 06105

The goal of studying biomaterials is to understand how the body's natural tissues are organized on a compositional,
structural, and properties basis. We also seek to understand how the body recognizes and responds to foreign materials, and
combine this knowledge in order to successfully design implants that can be used to treat debilitating diseases.

END

Fundamentals Of Particle Technology

CHE 06474:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06100 or CHEM 06105

This course introduces students to the chemical engineering functions of particle technology. Students analyze and design
chemical industry processes involving particles. The basic chemistry of particle synthesis and manufacturing is presented.
Principles of mass and heat transfer, fluid flow and chemical reaction kinetics are used to analyze a wide range of industrial
processes involving particles. Processes involving fluidization, pneumatic conveying, multi-phase mixing and catalysis will be
discussed. Laboratory experiments and demonstrations will be integrated throughout the course.

END

Principles of Biopharmaceutical and Industrial Fluid Mixing

CHE 06475:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06100 or CHEM 06105

Students in this course will demonstrate the importance mixing of in both biotechnology and the pharmaceutical
industries. The design project in this class will include a product that requires multiple process steps involving multiple
phases and complex liquids and chemical reactions. Students will apply single and multi-phase fluid dynamica to the design
of an industrial process that includes equipment design. A major objective of the class is to develop equipment for the
biotechnology and pharmaceutical industry.

END

Principles Of Bioseparation Processes

CHE 06476:

This course will focus on the fundamental principles of bioseparation processes. The characteristics of bioseparations will
be presented as applied to downstream processing in the pharmaceutical/biotechnology and related industries. Theory and
design of filtration, microfiltration, centrifugation, cell disruption, extraction, adsorption, chromatography, precipitation,
ultrafiltration, crystallization, and drying will be presented as applied to biosystems. Commercial design considerations,
such as sanitary design/sterilization, water quality, solvent recovery, waste disposal and biosafety will be reviewed.

END

Fundamentals Of Engineering Process Analysis And Experimental Design

CHE 06477:

This course exposes students to advanced engineering applications of process analysis and experimental design. The course
includes a multidisciplinary approach with theoretical background to support the course applications. Students will use
advanced statistical and optimization techniques for process analysis and experimental design, process monitoring and
quality control presently used in industry. The analysis and experimental design techniques presented in this course serve to
optimize complex industrially relevant processes and make engineering design and calculations more effective. Applications
from a wide range of industries will be presented including pharmaceutical, food, bulk and specialty chemicals, and
petroleum industry applications.

END

Tissue Engineering Fundamentals

CHE 06478:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01210 or BIOL 01211 or BIOL 01204

Tissue engineering is an expanding field that integrates principles of biology and engineering for the development of tissue
substitutes and artificial organs. This course, which utilizes a combined lecture-laboratory approach, will review embryology,
cell culture techniques, stem cell biology, cell signaling, cell development and differentiation, biocompatibility, tissue
organization and function, biomaterial synthesis/characterization, and structure-function relationships in tissue engineering
scaffolds.

END

Industrial Process Pathways

CHE 06479:

Prerequisites: CHE 06316

This course will study chemical reaction mechanisms that play crucial roles in the chemical industry. Fundamentals of
reaction thermochemistry and reaction kinetics will be discussed. Students will learn to construct mechanistic models of
complex, multi-reaction systems, and to apply these models to the solution of practical problems such as yield optimization.

END

CHE 06480:

This course will overview strategies for planning and directing long-term engineering projects. Topics will include project
organization, project scheduling, allocation of resources, project optimization and financial analyses.

Project Optimization In Engineering

END

Advanced Process Analysis

CHE 06481:

This course will examine advanced topics in process analysis including: process consistency, identification of optimal
process based on economic analysis, process documentation including flowsheets and budgets, replacement analysis for
processing equipment, and rationing limited resources between competing projects.

END

Principles Of Food Engineering

CHE 06482:

Prerequisites: MATH 01141, CHEM 06100 and CHEM 06105 or MATH 01131

This course introduces students to chemical engineering fundamentals applied to food processing systems. Students
analyze and design food engineering processes. The basic chemistry required for understanding of food systems is presented.
Basic principles of mass transfer, heat transfer, fluid flow, chemical reaction, process control, and mixing are used to analyze
or design food production systems. Computer simulations will be used for the design of food processing systems. Laboratory
experiments and demonstrations will be integrated throughout the course.

END

Principles Of Engineering Exercise Physiology

CHE 06483:

Prerequisites: MATH 01236 and CHEM 06100

This course introduces students to chemical engineering fundamentals applied to physiologic systems, primarily during
exercise. The basic biochemistry and physiology required for understanding these systems is presented. Basic principles of
mass transfer, heat transfer, fluid flow, thermodynamics, and chemical reaction are used to analyze the human metabolic
system, respiratory system, cardiovascular system, and thermal system. The interrelationships of these systems will be
investigated, and their dynamic response to exercise will be studied. Laboratory experiments will be conducted throughout
the course. This course is jointly taught with the Department of Health and Exercise Science.

END

Fundamentals Of Controlled Release

CHE 06484:

Controlled release systems are designed to provide delivery of an agent at a pre-determined rate for an extended period of
item. Controlled release offers several advantages over traditional methods of formulation and administration: maintenance
of effective concentrations for a sustained period, less total agent required, cost effectiveness, convenience and compliance.
This course introduces students to chemical engineering fundamentals applied to controlled release systems. Basic
principles of materials, mass transfer, heat transfer, fluid flow and chemical reactions are used to analyze and design
controlled release systems. Applications to pharmaceutical, agricultural, and food industries will be explored. Laboratory
experiments and demonstrations will be integrated throughout the course.

END

Fundamentals Of Engineering Quality Control

CHE 06485:

Prerequisites: MATH 01235

This course will expose students to the fundamental principles of engineering quality control and process controller design.
Students will learn basic control charting techniques and process capability assessment. The course will include process
monitoring and control techniques routinely used in industry and expose students to the relevance of these techniques in
the design and development of processes and process safety and risk assessment. The course will include numerous examples
from a wide range of engineering applications and industries.

END

Membrane Processes

CHE 06486:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06105 and MATH 01131 or MATH 01141 or CHEM 06100 and MATH 01131

Principles of membrane processes: reverse osmosis, ultrafiltration, microfiltration, electrodialysis, prevaporation, gas
permeation, and their application to traditional and emerging fields. Membrane materials and structure. Mass transfer and
design aspects for both liquid and gas seperation systems.

END

Applied Process Optimization

CHE 06487:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06315 and CHE 06316 and CHE 06405

In chemical and biochemical processes, optimization is essential to determine appropriate design and operating
conditions. These systems have wide-range of complexities and requires multiple modeling methods and solution
algorithms. Thus, topics studied will include, linear optimization, nonlinear optimization (convex and nonconvex), discrete
optimization, heuristic optimization, uncertainty characterization, stochastic optimization, optimal control and
multi-objective optimization. Will include computer lab sessions to demonstrate case studies in GAMS and Matlab.

END

Special Topics In Chemical Engineering: Topic

CHE 06490:

Prerequisites: (MATH 01131 or MATH 01140) and (CHEM 06100 or CHEM 06105)

This course presents chemical engineering topics related to recent developments in industrial practice or research. May be
repeated.

END

Engineering Process Analysis

CHE 06640:

This course focuses on engineering processes and introduces students to the commonalities among processes and
manufacturing platforms. Students will learn analysis techniques relevant to engineering process data and to assess data
quality, compare different types of engineering data, and develop process data models. In addition, students will be
introduced to time series analysis and multivariate analysis methods.

END

Essentials of General Chemistry

CHEM 05100:

This course presents fundamental principles of chemistry and math as well as their application to solving chemistry
problems used in Chemistry I (CHEM 06100). Students will learn essential chemical principles to succeed in Chemistry I.
Chemistry background information on topics such as the composition, structures and properties of matter, elemental
symbols, elemental properties, isotopes, composition of matter, chemical formulas, atoms, molecules an moles, basic
stoichiometry, and the concepts of acids and bases will be presented. Mathematical topics including solving simple algebraic
equations, unit conversions, the metric system, use of proportions, percentages, and word problems within the context of
general chemistry will also be presented. There are no pre-reqs for this course.

END

Chemistry Of Everyday Life (Lecture And Lab)

CHEM 05102:

A one-semester course for the non-science major presenting an overview of General, Organic and Biochemistry. Emphasis
is upon the application of chemical principles to industrial processes, environmental concerns and biologically interesting
reactions. This course cannot be applied for credit toward a science major nor used as prerequisite for CHEM06.101

END

Chemistry in the World Around Us

CHEM 05103:

This course provides a one semester (no lab) introduction to chemistry for non-science and non-engineering majors. The
course will focus on the foundational scientific principles of chemistry that influence our existence. Emphasis is on
developing scientific literacy and critical thinking through the study of the chemical processes that are industrially,
pharmaceutically, or environmentally relevant. 

END

Introduction to Cannabis- A Chemistry Perspective

CHEM 05104:

This course is an introduction to various chemistry aspects of cannabis and related compounds. Topics discussed in this
course include isolation of cannabis from natural sources, post-processing, separation, purification, and formulation, all of
which play a key role in large-scale preparation of cannabis products. While the focus will be on chemistry, this course is
designed for anyone who aspires to be a part of this growing industry or is interested in expanding their knowledge in the
field.

END

Introduction to Forensic Science

CHEM 05249:

This course is intended to introduce non-science and non-engineering majors to fundamental chemical and biochemical
principles that underlie standard forensic investigative approaches. This will include basic structure and function of
biomolecules, cellular processes, analytical methods to detect and measure target materials, and standard examples that are
relevant to common investigative procedures. There also will be discussion of good laboratory practices and statistical
analysis of complex datasets.

END

Chemistry Learning Assistant for General and Organic Chemistry

CHEM 05300:

This upper-level chemistry course is designed to provide students with experience in facilitating problem solving in small
groups and broaden their knowledge of basic chemistry. Students will gain this experience by 1) completing problem sets to
be embedded in lecture to prepare for class facilitation, 2) providing assistance to students during small group work in
lecture, 3) exploring current literature in chemical education research. This course is recommended for all Chemistry and
Chemistry-related students since it improves their depth of knowledge of chemistry while enhancing their communication
skills.

END

Chemistry In The Environment

CHEM 05301:

Prerequisites: MATH 03305 or ENST 94101 or CHEM 05102

This course relates the fundamentals of chemistry learned in the pre-req course to the natural processes found in
nature. It also examines how chemistry is related to environmental concerns in our modern world. The course is not
designed for majors in science and engineering.

END

CHEM 05310:

Independent Study-Chem

END

Forensic Chemistry (Lecture And Lab)

CHEM 05350:

This course considers the application of physical and chemical methods to the identification and analysis of the physical
evidence associated with a crime. The course emphasizes those areas of chemistry and to a lesser extent physics, biology and
geology useful for determining the evidential value of crime scene and related evidence. The laboratory experience
emphasizes the application of physical and chemical analytical procedures to the examination of materials that would likely
be considered evidence in a crime.

END

Advanced Topics In Chemistry

CHEM 05430:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07201

This course covers special topics in individual areas of chemistry. Specific pre-reqs are determined by the nature of the
course when it is announced.

END

Cooperative Experience In Chemistry

CHEM 05435:

The goal of this course is to provide the student with the opportunity to participate in a research/development experience
in a non-academic setting. The course may be taken as an advanced elective by students with Junior or Senior status for a
maximum of 3 s.h. credit. It may be elected to fulfill the research requirement of the BS in Chemistry major, It can be taken
more than once.

END

CHEM 05440:

This course provides individual laboratory investigation of a topic outside the scope of existing courses; laboratory and
conferences are required. The results of investigation will be presented in a written and oral report.

Research I

END

CHEM 05441:

Prerequisites: CHEM 05440

This course is a continuation of CHEM05.440.

Research II

END

Seminar I

CHEM 05450:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07348 or CHEM 08400

In this course students give oral reports on topics chosen from the current chemical literature. Students must attend local
professional meetings.

END

Special Topics in Chemistry

CHEM 05530:

Selected topics in individual areas of chemistry (analytical, organic, inorganic or physical). Consent of the instructor is
necessary. pre-reqs are determined by the nature of the topic. The requirements of this course include a graduate
laboratory project and/or research paper. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Advanced Seminar

CHEM 05550:

Oral presentation of scientific studies and data at the graduate level. The talks are accompanied by 35 mm slides prepared
by the student. Attendance at South Jersey American Chemical Society meetings is required. This course may not be offered
annually.

END

Chemistry I

CHEM 06100:

Prerequisites: Passing grade on Chemistry Placement Exam or C- or better in CHEM 05100

This course presents the basic principles involved in the study of chemistry. It emphasizes modern theories and laws used
in the understanding of the structures and reactions of the elements and compounds and also includes gas laws,
stoichiometry, and solution theory.

END

Chemistry II (Lecture And Lab)

CHEM 06101:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06100 or CHEM 06105

This course is a continuation of CHEM06.100. It covers these topics: equilibria, including acids and bases, complexes, and
sparingly soluble compounds, thermodynamics, kinetics, electrochemistry, and solution theory. Descriptive inorganic
chemistry is also covered.

END

Advanced College Chemistry I (Lecture And Lab)

CHEM 06105:

Prerequisites: Passing grade on Chemistry Placement Exam OR C- or better in Essentials of General Chemistry(CHEM 05100) OR
appropriate AP test scores (3, 4, or 5).

This course is an introductory chemistry course for students in chemistry and biochemistry. The content includes theories
and laws used in the understanding of the structures and reactions of elements and compounds, atomic structure,
stoichiometry, gas laws, states of matter, and solution theory. Illustrative examples focusing on the research interests of the
Department will be used to introduce topics. Introduction to Advanced laboratory methods will also be covered. It is not
recommended for those who do not have a declared science or engineering major.

END

Advanced College Chemistry II (Lecture And Lab)

CHEM 06106:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06105Advanced College Chemistry I.

This course is a continuation of Advanced College Chemistry I. Topics include thermodynamics, chemical kinetics,
chemical equilibrium, acid base chemistry, precipitation reactions, redox reactions, and electrochemistry. Illustrated
examples focusing on the research interests of the Department will be used to introduce topics. Advanced laboratory
methods will also be covered.

END

Advanced Inorganic Chemistry

CHEM 06300:

Prerequisites: CHEM 08400

This course studies concepts and models of inorganic chemistry. It explains molecular geometries and other physical and
chemical properties on the basis of the several chemical bonding theories and with reference to the periodic table. Students
study both main group and transition element chemistries. The laboratory component emphasizes the synthesis and
characterization of inorganic compounds.

END

Inorganic Chemistry

CHEM 06301:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07201 or CHEM 07202

This course covers the basic concepts and models of inorganic chemistry. The course encompasses the study of vaious
elements in the periodic table along with their components. Students study the descriptive chemistry of both main group
and d-block transition elements.

END

Advanced Inorganic Chemistry Lecture

CHEM 06400:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06301

This course covers concepts and models of inorganic chemistry. It encompasses molecular geometries and other physical
and chemical properties on the basis of the several chemical bonding theories and with reference to the periodic table.
Students study the chemistry of both main group and d-block transition elements.

END

Advanced Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory

CHEM 06401:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06400 with concurrency allowed.

This course covers concepts and models of inorganic chemistry in the laboratory setting. Students study both main group
and transition element chemistries. The laboratory component emphasizes the synthesis and characterization of inorganic
compounds.

END

Organic Chemistry I (Lecture And Lab)

CHEM 07200:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06101 or CHEM 06106

This course studies the chemistry of carbon compounds and their properties, structures and reactions. It emphasizes the
study of the principle classes of aliphatic and aromatic compounds, which in conjunction with selected experiments, gives an
understanding of the mechanisms of organic reactions. Required for science majors.

END

CHEM 07201:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07200

This course is a continuation of CHEM07.200. Required for science majors.

Organic Chemistry II (Lecture And Lab)

END

Industrial Organic Chemistry

CHEM 07202:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07200, Restricted to engineering majors.

Industrial Organic Chemistry will cover common topics found typically in Organic Chemistry II (CHEM07.201) but will
focus on the utility of this chemistry in an industrial setting. Highlights include: polymer synthesis, mineral sources of
chemicals, renewable sources of chemicals, green chemistry, aromatic materials, coal, organic color chemistry, detergents,
food, pharmaceutical chemistry, and others.

END

Organic Chemistry II for Biomedical Sciences

CHEM 07203:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07200

This course studies the chemistry of carbon compounds and their properties, structures and reactions in biochemical
framework. It emphasizes the study of the principle classes of aliphatic and aromatic compounds, which in conjunction with
selected experiments, gives an understanding of the mechamisms of organic reactions. Specifically designed for Biomedical
Sciences and Engineering majors. This course if a continuation of CHEM 07201.

END

Biochemical Foundations of Nutrition

CHEM 07205:

Prerequisites: Chem 07200 and matriculation into BS in Nutrition and Dietetics

This course will advance students’ understanding of organic chemistry topics and will serve as an introduction to
biochemical concepts that are related to nutrition. This course is geared specifically towards the students pursuing the
coordinated BSMS nutrition and dietetics degree.

END

Biochemistry (Lecture And Lab)

CHEM 07348:

Prerequisites: (CHEM 07201 OR CHEM 07202 OR CHEM 07203) AND (MCB 01102 OR BIOL 01202 OR BIOL 01203)

This course deals with chemical compounds and reactions important to the functioning of biological systems and includes
a discussion of the metabolic pathways for energy production and biosynthesis.

END

Chemical Biology

CHEM 07357:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07201 or CHEM 07202 or CHEM 07203

The goal of this course is to describe how chemistry is applied to biochemical and biological systems to answer specific
questions. It examines the use of small, synthetic molecules that are used as probes of biochemical function as well as how to
design experiments using these molecules. The course also encompasses the use of purely synthetic compounds as functional
or structural mimics of biological molecules. The methods and techniques used to measure designed interactions will also be
discussed.

END

Natural Products Chemistry

CHEM 07388:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07201 OR CHEM 07202 OR CHEM 07203

This course is an introduction to the various aspects of chemistry that contribute to the extraction, isolation, analysis, and
biochemical effects of natural products. This course will focus on pharmaceutical, biotechnological, and medicinal
applications of these molecules with a special emphasis on cannabinoids.

END

Introduction To Polymer Chemistry

CHEM 07405:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07201 or CHEM 07202 or CHEM 07203

This course presents an introduction to the topic of polymer chemistry. The subject matter, by its nature, crosses all the
lines of specialization within chemistry. The structure, properties and synthesis of polymeric materials are covered in
accordance with the recommendations of the joint polymer education committee of the American Chemical Society.

END

Advanced Biochemistry Lecture

CHEM 07407:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07348 and CHEM 09250

This lecture course deals with complex biochemical processes involving the interaction of numerous classes of
biomolecules. Specifically the course focuses on the interplay of proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids in the
cellular response and adaptation to the environment, both locally in the cell and of the organism as a whole. The course
relies on both traditional descriptions of biochemical processes and the inclusion of primary literature sources to analyze
experimental data, explain methodology, and introduce cutting edge concepts.

END

Advanced Biochemistry

CHEM 07408:

Prerequisites: BIOL 14348 or CHEM 07348

This course provides an in-depth study of the principles involved in biological processes. It emphasizes the significance of
biochemical reactions and regulations as well as mechanisms. A thorough elucidation of the structure, function and
mechanism will be presented. The overall strategy of living systems will be illustrated. The laboratory experiments will
provide exposure to representative procedures and some important modern techniques.

END

Advanced Biochemistry Laboratory

CHEM 07409:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07407 (may be takenconcurrently) and CHEM 09250

This laboratory course deals with isolation and characterization of molecules from biochemical systems. The fundamentals
and applications of chromatographic, electrophoretic, and spectroscopy techniques applied to biological molecules are
taught through laboratory projects.

END

Medicinal Chemistry

CHEM 07410:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07201 or CHEM 07202 or CHEM 07203

A study of the biochemical principles and metabolic pathways with particular emphasis on pharmaceutical applications
and biotechnology. This course will focus on the molecular mechanisms of drug action and chemical basis of drug therapy.
Current methods used to study medicinal chemistry including recombinant DNA, combinatorial chemistry and
bioinformatics will be reviewed. A 3-D molecular modeling of drug targets and drug design will be integrated throughout the
course. Clinical trials of drug case study are included.

END

Introduction to Antibiotics

CHEM 07412:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07201 or CHEM 07202 or CHEM 07203

Antibiotics are broadly defined as agents that arrest or kill bacteria and serve a central role in modern medicine. Chemical
compounds that exhibit antibiotic activity are wide ranging in chemical composition and biochemical mechanism of action.
This course will provide an overview of the important class of biologically active molecules.

END

Advanced Topics In Biochemistry

CHEM 07431:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07201

This course covers special topics in individual areas of biochemistry. Specific pre-reqs are determineed by the nature
of the course when it is announced.

END

Biochemical Research Methods

CHEM 07442:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07348

This course provides individual laboratory investigation of a topic beyond the scope of existing courses based on current
research in the department. The results of the research project will be presented in a written and oral report.

END

Advanced Organic Chemistry I (Lecture) - WI

CHEM 07464:

Prerequisites: ENGL 01112, CHEM 07201

This course provides an advanced presentation of the major classes of organic chemistry reactions, giving major emphasis
to the detailed mechanisms of such reactions. Modern organic theory is included. This course is generally offered in fall
every other year. A writing intensive course.

END

Physical Organic Chemistry

CHEM 07465:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07201 or CHEM 07203

This course covers the study of the physicochemical properties of organic reactions. Major topics of discussion include the
study of kinetics and conformational analysis of molecules. The basic reactivity patterns and the physicochemical rules that
define reaction mechanisms will also be introduced. The course is ideal for Chemistry, Biochemistry, Chemical Engineering,
and Biology majors.

END

CHEM 07466:

This is a continuation of CHEM07.464. It examines classes of compounds and reactions not presented in CHEM07.464.
This course is not offered annually.

Advanced Organic Chemistry II (Lecture)

END

Organic Preparations (Lecture & Lab)

CHEM 07467:

This is a laboratory course that provides an in-depth study of the procedures and key organic transformations that can be
applied to the pharmaceutical and fine chemical industry. Major topics of discussion include the preparations of carbonyl
derivatives and functionalized aromatics as well as other key pharmacological scaffolds. The course is ideal for Chemistry,
Biochemistry, Chemical Engineering, and Biology majors.

END

Organic Spectroscopic Analysis (Lecture And Lab)

CHEM 07470:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07201 or CHEM 07202 or CHEM 07203

This is a laboratory course with class discussion on the separation and identification of organic compounds. It uses both
classical and instrumental techniques in compound structure determination. Lectures emphasize interpreting IR, NMR and
mass spectra. This course is not offered annually.

END

Organometallic Chemistry

CHEM 07472:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07201 OR CHEM 07202 or CHEM 07203

This course covers the chemistry of organometallic compounds and corresponding applications in diverse fields such as
organic synthesis, pharmaceutical industry, and the petroleum chemical industry. Major topics of discussion include the
study of physical and chemical properties, characterization, and preparation of organic compounds. The basic reactivity
patterns and the reaction mechanisms will also be introduced. The course is ideal for Chemistry, Biochemistry, Chemical
Engineering, and Biology majors.

END

Polymer Synthesis

CHEM 07475:

Prerequisites: (CHEM 07201 or CHEM 07203) and (CHEM 08401 or CHEM 08305)

This course provides an in-depth study of the procedures, techniques and theoretical aspects of polymer synthesis.
Reaction mechanisms including kinetic and thermodynamic considerations will be studied. The topic of polymer synthesis
will be examined from raw material sources through product usage. The laboratory experiments will provide exposure to
representative procedures and techniques.

END

Polymer Characterization

CHEM 07478:

Prerequisites: (CHEM 07201 or CHEM 07203) and (CHEM 08401 or CHEM 08305)

This course provides an in-depth study of the procedures, techniques and theoretical aspects of polymer characterization.
Major topics include molecular weight determinations, polymer solutions, viscoelasticity and bulk properties. The
laboratory experiments will provide exposure to representative procedures and techniques with emphasis on molecular
weight determination and thermal methods.

END

CHEM 07490:

General Aspects of Pharmacology

Prerequisites: CHEM 07348 OR MCB 01333 OR BIOL 14440

This course provides an understanding of the basic principles and mechanisms in pharmacology. Topics discussed include
drug discovery, pharmacodynamics, and pharmacokinetics, and the interactions between drugs and living tissues. It also
provides fundamental knowledge about mechanisms of action, structure-activity relationships, drug metabolism, testing and
regulation of pharmaceuticals, and drug-drug interactions.

END

Pharmaceutical Chemistry

CHEM 07492:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07201 or CHEM 07202 or CHEM 07203

This course covers the structure, properties, and preparation, of organic and inorganic pharmaceutical drugs. Some of the
topics that will be discussed include natural source derived organic pharmaceuticals, inorganic pharmaceuticals, and their
properties under biological conditions, etc. This course is ideal for Chemistry, Biochemistry, Biology, and Chemical
Engineering majors.

END

CHEM 07493:

Introduction to Regulatory Affairs

Prerequisites: CHEM 07201 or CHEM 07202 or CHEM 07203

This course will provide an introduction to the regulatory requirements associated with the medial product/device
development. This course would be relevant to the students majoring in chemistry and biochemistry with an interest in
allied health professions.

END

Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) Techniques

CHEM 07494:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07201 or CHEM 07202 or CHEM 07203

This course will provide an introduction to Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) techniques in Food and Pharmaceutical
industries. The course will cover Good Laboratory Practice techniques commonly employed in the non-clinical as well as
clinical laboratory studies. This course might be relevant to the students majoring in chemistry, biochemistry, and chemical
engineering.

END

CHEM 07531:

This course covers special topics in individual areas of biochemistry. Specific pre-reqs are determined by the nature of
the course when it is announced.

Special Topics in Biochemistry

END

Chemical Biology

CHEM 07557:

The goal of this course is to describe how chemistry is applied to biochemical and biological systems to answer specific
questions. It examines the use of small, synthetic molecules that are used as probes of biochemical function as well as how to
design experiments using these molecules. The course also encompasses the use of purely synthetic compounds as functional
or structural mimics of biological molecules. The methods and techniques used to measure designed interactions will also be
discussed.

END

Advanced Biochemistry Lecture

CHEM 07560:

This lecture course deals with complex biochemical processes involving the interaction of numerous classes of
biomolecules. Specifically the course focuses on the interplay of proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids in the
cellular response and adaptation to the environment, both locally in the cell and of the organism as a whole. The course
relies on both traditional descriptions of biochemical processes and the inclusion of primary literature sources to analyze
experimental data, explain methodology, and introduce cutting edge concepts.

END

Advanced Organic Synthesis

CHEM 07564:

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

This course will provide and in-depth overview of several synthetically useful chemical methodologies, reagents, and
reactions that are essential in synthesis of organic pharmaceuticals. Some of the general categories of reactions to be
discussed in this course include reduction, oxidation, protecting groups, and carbon-carbon bond forming reactions. This
course will survey a broad and diverse range of enantioselective, diastereoselective, chemoselective, and/or regioselective
chemical transformations critical for the preparation of medicinal compounds. This course would suit the needs of graduate
and senior undergraduate students who intend to pursue careers in the field of pharmaceutical sciences.

END

Organic Reactions And Mechanisms

CHEM 07565:

An advanced presentation of the major classes of organic chemical reactions, with the major emphasis being placed upon
the detailed mechanisms of such reactions. Modern organic theory is included. The requirements of this course include a
research paper or individual project. Admission to the course will be at the discretion of the graduate adviser. This course
may not be offered annually.

END

Medicinal Chemistry

CHEM 07568:

This course describes various topics related to the biochemical principles and metabolic pathways with particular emphasis
on pharmaceutical applications and biotechnology. This course will focus on the molecular mechanisms of drug action and
chemical basis for drug therapy. Current methods used to study medicinal chemistry including recombinant DNA,
combinatorial chemistry and bioinformatics, will be reviewed. A 3-D molecular modeling of drug targets and drug design will
be integrated throughout the course. Clinical trials of drug case study are included. A term project is incorporated into this
course. Students are required to conduct an in-depth review of the literature regarding a topic.

END

Organic Spectroscopy

CHEM 07570:

This is a laboratory course with class discussion on the separation and identification of organic compounds. Both classical
and instrumental techniques are used in compound structure determination. Lecture emphasis is placed on interpreting IR,
NMR, and mass spectra. The requirements of this course include a graduate laboratory project and/or research paper.
Admission to the course will be at the discretion of the graduate adviser. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Advanced Organometallic Chemistry

CHEM 07572:

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

This course covers the chemistry of organometallic compounds and their applications in organic synthesis, and
pharmaceutical industry. Some of the topics discussed in this course include the study of physical and chemical properties,
characterization, analysis, and preparation of organometallic compounds, along with advanced organometallic reaction
mechanisms such as substitution, addition, elimination, and insertion, etc. The course is designed for pharmaceutical
sciences students and includes submission of a written report on original research literature in organometallic chemistry.

END

General Aspects of Pharmacology

CHEM 07590:

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

This course attempts to provide an understanding of the basic principles and mechanism in pharmacology. Some of the
topics discussed include pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of drugs, and their interactions with the living tissues. It
also provides a fundamental knowledge about the mechanism of action, structure-activity relationships, and interaction of
therapeutics with physiological system and metabolism of drugs.

END

Advanced Pharmaceutical Chemistry

CHEM 07592:

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

This course covers the structure, properties, preparation, and analysis of organic and inorganic pharmaceutical drugs. Some
of the topics that will be discussed include pharmacognosy, organic and inorganic pharmaceuticals, solubility characteristics
and properties of these compounds under biological conditions, etc. The course is designed for pharmaceutical sciences
students and includes submissions of a written report on original research literature in pharmaceutical chemistry.

END

Biophysical Chemistry

CHEM 08305:

Prerequisites: (CHEM 07201 OR CHEM 07202 OR CHEM 07203) and (MCB 01101 OR BIOL 01106) AND MATH 01131 and PHYS 00222 and CHEM 09250

This course covers the topics of physical chemistry and their applications in biochemistry. Topics include
thermodynamics, kinetics and spectroscopy.

END

Physical Chemistry I (Lecture)

CHEM 08400:

Prerequisites: (CHEM 07201 or CHEM 07202) and (MATH 01131 or MATH 01141) and (PHYS 02201 or PHYS 00222 or PHYS
02203 or PHYS 00211 or CHE 06302 or CHEM 07203)

This course deals with the problems of the fundamental principles underlying physical chemistry. It gives major emphasis
to thermodynamics, kinetics and quantum mechanics. It also includes spectroscopy, group theory and statistical mechanics.
MATH 01230 recommended.

END

CHEM 08401:

Prerequisites: CHEM 08400

This is a continuation of CHEM 08400.

Physical Chemistry II (Lecture)

END

Physical Chemistry Laboratory I

CHEM 08402:

Prerequisites: CHEM 09250 Minimum Grade of D- (may be taken concurrently) and Undergraduate level CHEM 08400 Minimum
Grade of D- (may be taken concurrently)

Laboratory work in this course is designed to illustrate the principles of physical chemistry.

END

CHEM 08403:

Prerequisites: CHEM 08402

This course is a continuation of CHEM08.402

Physical Chemistry Laboratory II

END

Applications in Experimental and Computational Chemistry

CHEM 08405:

Prerequisites: CHEM 08400 OR CHEM 08305

This course focuses on experimental and theoretical / computational techniques in chemistry, with emphasis on physical
chemistry. This hands-on lecture-based course will provide students with hands-on experience in different physical
chemistry methods for studying molecular structures, molecular interactions, reaction dynamics, and molecular electronic
properties. Both experiment-based and computational-based techniques will be explored with emphasis on utilizing modern
instrumentation and software to studying problems in diverse areas such as materials, biomedicine, and drug design.

END

Survey Of Molecular Modeling Methods

CHEM 08410:

Prerequisites: (CHEM 07201 or CHEM 07202 or CHEM 07203) and (MATH 01130 or MATH 01140)

This survey course emphasizes the applications of molecular modeling theory and simulations in chemistry and
biochemistry. The course will present to students a broad and in-depth knowledge of different modeling concepts and
methodologies, and provide students opportunities to apply modern computational software to investigate molecular
structures, chemical reactions, and biomolecular processes such as enzyme catalysis and protein conformational changes,
etc. This course is ideal for Chemistry, Biochemistry, Bioinformatics, and Pharmaceutical Science students.

END

Advanced Biophysical Chemistry

CHEM 08505:

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

This is a graduate-level Biophysical Chemistry cousre, which focuses on applications of physical chemistry concepts and
methods to biological systems. Topics cover the basic concepts of thermodynamics, reactions kinetics and spectroscopyk,
etc. Additionally, various specific biophysical chemistry topics and experimental techniques are to be discussed. The course
will equip students with a strong theoretical background to understand advanced topics covered in other courses. Students
will be additionally required to complete an independent literature report as directed by the instructor.

END

Advanced Survey of Molecular Modeling Methods

CHEM 08510:

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

This survey course emphasizes the applications of molecular modeling theory and simulations in chemistry and
biochemistry. The course will present to students a broad and in-depth knowledge of different modeling concepts and
methodologies, and provide students opportunities to apply modern computational software to investigate molecular
structures, chemical reactions, and biomolecular processes such as enzyme catalysis and protein conformational changes,
etc. The topics will include quantum chemistry calculations, molecular mechanics, molecular dynamics simulations, in silico
drug design, etc. This course is ideal for Chemistry, Biochemistry, Bioinformatics, and Pharmaceutical Science students.

END

Clinical Chemistry

CHEM 09200:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06101

This course focuses on the techniques and approaches to clinical chemistry. Topics covered include discussions of
instrumentation used in the analysis of clinical specimens, the handling of clinical samples, panels for analysis and quality
assessment.

END

Clinical Chemistry Lab

CHEM 09201:

Corequisites: CHEM 09200Prerequisites: CHEM 06101

This laboratory course provides hands-on training in selected techniques and approaches to clinical chemistry. This course
is taken concurrently with CHEM 09200 Clinical Chemistry.

END

Quality Assurance

CHEM 09202:

This course focuses on the techniques and approaches to quality assurance in clinical chemistry. Topics covered include
discussions of a range of activities that enable laboratories to achieve and maintain high levels of accuracy and proficiency
despite changes in test methods and the volume of specimens tested.

END

Analytical Chemistry

CHEM 09249:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06101 or CHEM 06106

This course is for those taking chemistry as a minor and covers basic concepts in analytical chemistry and serves to develop
skills needed to solve analytical problems in a quantitative manner. A wide range of techniques that are useful in modern
analytical chemistry are introduced. Statistics relevant to analytical chemistry molecular spectroscopy, atomic spectroscopy
as well as acid base chemical equilibrium are covered.

END

Quantitative Analysis (Lecture And Lab)

CHEM 09250:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06101 or CHEM 06106

This course provides lecture and laboratory experience in classical methods of gravimetric and volumetric analyses as well
as electrical and spectroscopic analyses.

END

Environmental Chemistry

CHEM 09300:

Prerequisites: CHEM 07200 and CHEM 09250

This course is comprehensive overview study of environmental science from a chemistry perspective. The course is
appropriate for junior/senior-level undergraduate students. Topics inlcude environmental pollution of soil, water and air,
atmosphere and climate change, and methods for measuring and abating this pollution.

END

Bioanalytical Chemistry

CHEM 09322:

Prerequisites: (CHEM 09249 or CHEM 09250) and (CHEM 07201 or CHEM 07202 or CHEM 07203)

This course will focus on the details of analysis of biomolecules using a variety of analytical techniques including liquid
chromatography, electrophoresis and capillary electrophoresis. A thorough discussion of mass spectrometry technique, as
applied to biomolecules, will be conducted. This course will also introduce students to different DNA analysis techniques
and electrochemical biosensors in biology and medicine. This also includes the analytical centrifugation methods as used in
determination of molecular weight of biomolecules. This course prepares students for graduate school, careers in pharmacy,
medical, and forensic among others.

END

Chemical Analysis of Cannabinoids

CHEM 09330:

Prerequisites: (CHEM 09249 or CHEM 09250) and (CHEM 07201 or CHEM 7202 or CHEM 7203)

This course is an introduction to the various aspects of chemical analysis that are used for the characterization of
cannabinoid content in a variety of natural and commercial products. The focus will be on extraction, spectroscopic
(including IR, UV/Vis, and mass spectrometry), and chromatographic techniques (gas chromatography, 
liquid
chromatography, preparative chromatography, and supercritical fluid chromatography), specifically related to their use for
cannabinoid analysis, residual solvent measurements, and pesticide detection.

END

Chemical Characterization of Surfaces and Materials

CHEM 09351:

Prerequisites: CHEM 09250

The majority of graduates from Chemistry and Biochemistry programs go on to obtain employment in the chemical and
pharmaceutical industries, with a large number of these positions requiring knowledge in analytical techniques for quality
control, quality assurance, and production. These students require strong, hands-on experience in modern analytical
techniques used for these jobs. This course will be especially beneficial to students who want to pursue careers in
pharmaceutical science and/or chemical manufacturing by combining specific lecture topics related to advanced
experimental analytical techniques and laboratory experiences utilizing related instrumentation. This is a combined lecture
and laboratory course.

END

Instrumental Methods (Lecture And Lab)

CHEM 09410:

Prerequisites: CHEM 08400 and CHEM 09250

This course covers the use of instrumental methods in the solution of chemical problems. It stresses both the theoretical
and practical aspects of obtaining and interpreting data. Among the instruments considered are visible, UV, IR, NMR, AA,
ICP, Raman and Mass Spectrometers as well as electrical and chromatographic techniques.

END

Electrochemistry

CHEM 09411:

Prerequisites: CHEM 09250 and PHYS 00222

This course covers principles of electrolyte solutions, thermodynamics and kinetics of electrochemical reactions, devices
and instrumentation of electrochemical measurements, techniques of electroanalytical methods, and examples of
bioelectrochemistry. The course introduces a variety of applications of the electroanalytical methods in the areas of
point-of-care diagnosis, hazard detection, and biosensors.

END

Supramolecular Chemistry

CHEM 09420:

Prerequisites: (CHEM 07201 or CHEM 07202 or CHEM 07203) and (CHEM 08400 or CHEM 08305 or CHE 06340)

The course is about concepts, structures, functions, and applications of supramolecular molecular systems. The
supramolecular systems discussed in this course include surface assembled monolayer and multilayers, L-B films, host-guest
molecular recognition systems, liquid crystals, and nanoclusters. Application of supramolecular chemistry includes clininc
diagnostics, drug design and drug delivery, biomimic, and nanofabrication.

END

Instrumental Analysis

CHEM 09510:

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

The theoretical basis, construction, and data interpretation of most instruments used by chemist are studied. Among the
instruments considered are visible, UV, IR, NMR, AA, fluorescence, flame emission, and mass spectrometers.
Electroanalytical, potentiometric, conductometric, electrogravimetric, and voltametric methods of analysis are used.
Laboratory experiments allow "hands-on" use of representative instruments. The requirements of this course include a
graduate laboratory project. Admission to the course will be at the discretion of the graduate adviser. This course may not be
offered annually.

END

Advanced Bioanalytical Chemistry

CHEM 09522:

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

This course will focus on the details of analysis of biomolecules using a variety of analytical techniques including liquid
chromatography, electrophoresis and capillary electrophoresis. A thorough discussion of mass spectometry technique, as
applied to biomolecules, will be conducted. This course will also introduce students to different DNA analysis techniques
and electrochemical biosensors in biology and medicine. This also includes the analytical centrifugation methods as used in
determination of molecular weight of biomolecules. This course prepares students for graduate school, careers in pharmacy,
medical, and forensic among others.

END

Introduction to Health Professions

INTR 01111:

There are many health profession career options with different responsibilities, training pathways, and educational
requirements. This course is designed to help students learn about many of these career options, understand those paths to
careers of interest, and develop professional materials. This course is meant to be outcomes driven with students finishing
with tangible resources that they can use to successfully navigate forward in their academic and career paths.

END

Introduction to Nature of Science -WI

INTR 06202:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course focuses on providing students with an overview of critical considerations and concepts relating to nature of
science (NOS), responsible conduct of research (RCR), rigor & reproducibility, scientific citizenship, the scientific
enterprise and ethical and philosophical issues in the applied sciences.

END

Biophysical Chemistry

PHYS 08305:

Prerequisites: BIOL 01101, MATH 01131, PHYS 02201, CHEM 07201 and CHEM 09250

This course covers the topics of physical chemistry and their applications in biochemistry. Topics include
thermodynamics, kinetics and spectroscopy. This course also provides laboratory experience in physical methods that apply
to biological systems.

END

Engineering Fundamentals I

CEE 08051:

An introduction to the practice of engineering through authentic, multidisciplinary problems and projects. Sustainability is
used to demonstrate the broader context of engineering work. The importance of diversity and inclusion in engineering
work is addressed. Course topics include: academic success strategies, engineering skills, engineering communication,
computer-based tools, entrepreneurial mindset, engineering design, and teamwork.

END

Engineering Fundamentals II

CEE 08052:

A continuation of Engineering Fundamentals 1 focused on product design that considers the needs of the customer. The
course provides expanded treatment of the practice of engineering through authentic, multidisciplinary projects. Project
work reinforces the following topics: statistics, economics, computer-based tools, entrepreneurial mindset, engineering
design, teamwork, diversity, inclusion, and ethics. This course has short seminar/lectures and long project sessions. On long
days students meet with the professor to complete additional activities and multi-week team-based projects. Some periods
are also used for team meetings, exams, student presentations, etc. To prepare for class, students read chapters assigned and
complete the recommended work beforehand.

END

Introduction to Infrastructure

CEE 08101:

Prerequisites: None

The civil infrastructure of the US is deteriorating rapidly. The quality of the infrastructure directly affects the economy
and security of the US. The next generation of civil and environmental engineers needs to be more skilled and more able to
create a sustainable infrastructure. The goal of this course is to introduce freshmen civil and environmental engineers to the
built infrastructure including bridges, buildings, foundations, dams, canals, roads, intersections, water treatment plants,
wastewater treatment plants, and solid waste landfills. Students will be exposed to case studies in each area of infrastructure
and will prepare final team oral and written reports on specific infrastructure cases.

END

CEE 08102:

The course deals with the creation and interpretation of engineering drawings, maps, and plans using engineering software
programs.

Engineering Graphics

END

Field Surveying

CEE 08103:

The course deals with the measurement of existing and man-made land profiles. The tasks performed include
measurements of drainage areas, distances, angles, and elevations; closing traverses; topographic surveys; and highway
alignments.

END

Surveying And Engineering Graphics

CEE 08203:

The course deals with the measurement of existing and man-made land profiles (surveying), and the creation and
interpretation of engineering drawings, maps and plans (engineering graphics). The tasks performed include the
measurements of drainage areas, distances, angles, and elevations; closing traverses; topographic surveys; and highway
alignments. Additional tasks include creation and interpretation of engineering plans, drawings, and maps using appropriate
engineering software programs.

END

Civil Engineering Materials

CEE 08301:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01271 with minimum grade of C- or ENGR 01272 with a minimum grade of D- or ENGR 01273 with a
minimum grade of D-

This course deals with asphalt pavement, concrete pavement, and structural concrete including: the testing and analysis of
aggregates, asphalt binders, cement and admixtures; the design of asphalt pavement, concrete pavement, and structural
concrete; and the testing and analysis of asphalt pavement specimens, concrete pavement specimens, and structural
concrete specimens. The course includes appropriate laboratory experiments.

END

Civil Engineering Systems

CEE 08305:

Prerequisites: MATH 01131 or MATH 01140

The course deals with the theories and principles of civil engineering systems as applied to real-world analysis and design
problems. The course covers four important areas of civil engineering systems: linear programming, project scheduling,
probability and statistics, and engineering economics. The course includes appropriate computer applications.

END

Environmental Engineering I

CEE 08311:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06100 with a grade of C- or better

This course deals with topics in principles of environmental engineering, including ecosystems, water and wastewater
treatment and design, and sludge/residuals management.

END

Sustainable Civil & Environmental Engineering

CEE 08312:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06100 with C- or better grade.

This course deals with topics in solid and hazardous waste and air pollution engineering, including regulations,
fundamentals, evaluation, management, prevention, treatment and disposal.

END

Water Resources Engineering

CEE 08342:

Prerequisites: (ENGR 01341 with a grade of C- or better or ENGR 01342 with a grade of C- or better) and (MATH 01235 with a grade
of D- or better or MATH 01231 with a grade of D- or better)

This course deals with the analysis and design of basic water flow structures using the principles of hydraulics and
hydrology. The topics covered in hydrology include the analysis of rainfall, runoff, groundwater flow, and stream flow. The
topics covered in hydraulics include the analysis and design of hydraulic structures such as weirs, open channels, culverts,
and storm sewers. The course includes appropriate laboratory experiments and computer applications.

END

Geotechnical Engineering

CEE 08351:

Prerequisites: (ENGR 01341 with a grade of C- or better or ENGR 01342 with a grade of C- or better) and (ENGR 01272 with a grade
of C- or better or ENGR 01273 with a grade of C- or better) and CEE 08301

The course deals with the basic principles of geo-technical engineering including soil properties and soil mechanics. The
study of soil properties includes soil gradation, void ratio, porosity, water content, degree of saturation, specific gravity, soil
consistency, soil classification. The study of soil mechanics includes permeability, capillarity, seepage and stresses in soils.
The course includes appropriate laboratory experiments.

END

Transportation Engineering

CEE 08361:

Prerequisites: CEE 08103 (may be taken concurrently) or CEE 08203 (may be taken concurrently)

The course deals with the analysis, design, construction, operation, maintenance, rehabilitation, and efficiency of
transportation systems and mass transit systems. The course includes a study of the impact on transportation systems
caused by sociological, geographical, economic and environmental factors. The course also includes appropriate field
measurements and computer applications.

END

Structural Analysis

CEE 08382:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01272 with a grade of C- or better or ENGR 01273 with a grade of C- or better

This course deals with the analysis of simply-supported and continuous structures using classic and matrix analysis
methods including integration, moment-area, conjugate beam, virtual work, force, and stiffness methods. Trusses, beams,
and frames are considered in the course.

END

Analysis And Design Of Steel Frames

CEE 08383:

Prerequisites: CEE 08382

This course deals with the analysis and design of structural frames. Analysis using the stiffness method is emphasized. The
design of frame members includes the design of steel beams and beam-columns, connections for steel frames, bracing and
composite steel/concrete members. Steel joists and decking are also introduced. The course includes appropriate computer
applications.

END

Engineering Estimating For Seniors

CEE 08404:

Prerequisites: ECON 04102

The course deals with the development of engineering estimates for civil engineering projects and project components
including labor, materials, and equipment. Total project costs including direct and indirect costs, field and home-office
costs, and contingency are covered. Also covered are the various types of civil engineering estimates including piles and
cofferdams, wellpoints and earthdrilling, water and sewer systems, road and highway pavements, concrete buildings and
bridges, and steel buildings and bridges. The course includes appropriate computer applications.

END

Environmental Treatment Process Principles

CEE 08412:

Prerequisites: CEE 08412

Topics Coagulation/Flocculation, Filtration, Sedimentation, Disinfection, Ion Exchange, Chemical Oxidation, Corrosion and
Membranes.

END

Introduction To Environmental Management

CEE 08413:

Prerequisites: CEE 08311

This course deals with integrated environmental management issues and methodologies with a global perspective. Topics
include environmental decision-making from a socio-economic and environmental standpoint, environmental data
collection, analysis, and management, techniques for environmental assessment and feasibility case studies. The course is
intended to give students an understanding of current environmental issues and tools for analysis of data for environmental
management. The issues are examined from the worldwide perspectives of science, engineering, business, and society.

END

Site Remediation Engineering Principles

CEE 08422:

Prerequisites: CEE 08311

This course deals with topics with site remediation engineering. Topics include site characterization, site safety, modeling
site conditions, conducting feasibility studies, and designing remediation systems, such as pump and treat, stabalization,
containment, treatment walls, natural attenuation, enhanced bioremediation, phytoremediation, oxidation, soil flushing,
and soil vapor extraction.

END

Solid And Hazardous Waste Management

CEE 08431:

Prerequisites: CEE 08311

The course deals with solid and hazardous waste sources, regulations and management; engineering principles; treatment
and disposal methods; design of landfills; recycling; toxicology principles; and risk assessment. The course includes
appropriate laboratory experiments and computer applications.

END

Pollutant Fate And Transport Principles

CEE 08432:

Prerequisites: CEE 08311

This course deals with topics in characteristics and properties of organic pollutants, aquatic chemistry, transport
mechanisms for pollutants (Absorption, Retardation, Attenuation, Volatilization, Biodegradation), groundwater
(Properties, Flow Equations, Transport in Porous Media) and mathematical modeling

END

Principles Of Integrated Solid Waste Management

CEE 08433:

Prerequisites: CEE 08311

The course deals with the theories and principles of integrated solid waste management as applied to real-world analysis
and design problems. The course covers the design of facilities and programs, such as landfills, composting facilities, transfer
stations, collection programs, and drop-off centers, and planning of integrated systems for municipalities and counties.
Computer applications are included.

END

Sustainable Technologies For Built Environments

CEE 08436:

Prerequisites: (Any 100 level MATH) or STAT Course

This course introduces engineering and non-engineering students to innovative technologies that must be employed to
sustain the human species on Earth by reducing the impact of urban communities. After an introduction to Sustainability,
technologies will be considered in five areas related to the built environment: environmental protection, energy, water,
shelter, and transportation. The course is designed to increase students' understanding of sustainable technologies and
ability to incorporate such technologies into programs to improve sustainability.

END

Sustainable Buildings

CEE 08437:

Prerequisites: (Any 100 level MATH) or STAT Course

This course introduces engineering and non-engineering students to innovative designs that can be employed to better
sustain the human species on Earth by reducing the impact of buildings. After an introduction to the impact of buildings on
sustainability, technologies will be considered in five areas: sustainable sites, water, energy, materials, and indoor
environmental quality.

END

Surface Hydrology

CEE 08441:

Prerequisites: CEE 08342

This course is to increase knowledge on the application of hydrologic methods to water resources problems. Specifics
include the use of probabilistic techniques to characterize hydrologic processes. Such analyses are characterized by data
collection, analysis and interpretation, simulation, and forecasting. The level of understanding should, upon completion of
the course, be sufficient to understand and appreciate the important issues in the current literature where statistical and
optimization methods are used in prediction and interpretation of hydrologic processes. Synergy between hydrological
processes and environmental quality, hydrometeorology, global warming, informatics, and ecology and conversation will be
discussed.

END

Hydrometeorology

CEE 08442:

Prerequisites: CEE 08342

This course introduces hydrometeorology to the students and latest technologies used by water resources engineers for
understanding, modeling and simulating the global water issues. This course will investigate the relationship between
hydrology and meteorology and focus on key processes including precipitation, stream and ground water flow, flooding,
water chemistry and contamination, and water resource management. A large component of the course will include
collecting and analyzing data, estimating stream flow, and using spreadsheet and graphic programs to monitor water levels
following precipitation events. Students in the class will use state of the art software to analyze the collected datasets.
Topics included in this course are intended for students engaged in environmental and water resources engineering. The
course is designed for students that are familiar with key concepts from courses in mathematics, hydrology, and water
monitoring.

END

Advanced Water Resources Engineering For Seniors

CEE 08443:

Prerequisites: CEE 08342

The fundamental theme of the course is the study of advanced topics in water resources engineering including the analysis
and design of advanced hydraulic structures, hydraulic similitude and modeling, wave action, and advanced hydrology. The
course includes appropriate laboratory experiments and computer applications.

END

Principles Of Hydraulic Design

CEE 08444:

Prerequisites: CEE 08342

The fundamental theme of the course is the design and analysis of structures for controlling and conveying water in both
the built and natural environment. Topics covered vary from year to year based upon instructor and student interests. Past
topics have included open channel flow design, dams and spillways sanitary and storm sewers, culverts, pumping stations,
turbomachinery, and hydraulic similitude and modeling.

END

Principles Of Environmental Fluid Mechanics

CEE 08445:

Prerequisites: CEE 08342

The fundamental theme of the course is the engineering study of fluid flow in the environment. Advanced topics in water
resources engineering are explored, with content varying based upon instructor and student interests. Past topics have
included open channel flow, hydrology, fish passage at hydraulic structures, sediment transport, mixing in natural water
bodies, and water quality modeling. The course includes appropriate laboratory and/or field experiments and computer
applications.

END

River Engineering Principles

CEE 08446:

Prerequisites: CEE 08342

This course presents the theory and analytical techniques for the design and analysis of engineering projects that control or
convey water in open channel systems. Topics include sediment transport, design of hydraulic structures, river restoration,
and computer modeling.

END

Watershed Engineering Principles

CEE 08447:

Prerequisites: CEE 08342

This course presents the theory and analytical techniques for the design and analysis of stormwater management projects.
Topics include environmental law, stormwater mitigation structures, rainfall-runoff analysis, limnology, and computer
modeling.

END

Introduction to Water and Environmental Monitoring

CEE 08448:

Prerequisites: CEE 08203 and CEE 08342

This course introduces the latest technologies and techniques used by water resources and environmental engineers for
mapping, modeling and monitoring. The goal of this class is to allow students to develop an understanding of water and
environmental spaces and how maps represent them. This course will provide an overview of the application of advance
geographic information system, remote sensing and complex mapping in water resources and environmental engineering.
Students will use satellite images to extract data and produce viable information. State of the art software will be uses in this
class.

END

Foundation Engineering For Seniors

CEE 08452:

Prerequisites: CEE 08351 with D- or better grade.

The fundamental theme of the course is the analysis and design of structural building and bridge foundations based on
advanced principles of soil mechanics. These advanced principles of soil mechanics include compressibility, shear strength,
and bearing capacity. The types of foundations analyzed and designed include spread footings and pile foundations. The
course includes appropriate laboratory experiments and computer applications.

END

Earth Retaining Systems For Seniors

CEE 08453:

Prerequisites: CEE 08351 with D- or better grade.

The fundamental theme of the course is earth retaining systems including advanced principles of soil mechanics and
analysis and design of earth retaining systems. The advanced principles of soil mechanics covered include lateral soil pressure
and slope stability. The analysis and design of earth retaining systems includes slopes, embankments, retaining walls, and
other systems. The course includes appropriate laboratory experiments and computer applications.

END

Introduction to Geosynthethics

CEE 08454:

Prerequisites: CEE 08301 and CEE 08351

The fundamental theme of this course is the engineering study of the types and methods used in the geosynthetics for
geotechnical applications. These include understanding of the types and applications of geosynthetics, field construction of
geosynthetic systems, and design methods for geotextiles, geogrids, geomembranes, and geocomposites.

END

Transportation Planning, Demand, And Data Analysis

CEE 08463:

Prerequisites: CEE 08361

This course introduces students to the general field of transportation planning including travel demand analysis and data
collection methods. Statistical data collection and analysis methods are discussed. Examples using the traditional four-step
planning process illustrate common planning procedures. Computer applications are included.

END

Elements of Transportation Engineering

CEE 08464:

Prerequisites: CEE 08361

The fundamental theme of the course is the study of advanced topics in highway design and analysis, signalized and
un-signalized intersection design, forecast travel demand modeling and transportation planning. Topics covered vary from
year to year based upon instructor and student interests. This course also includes field measurements and computer
applications.

END

Pavement Analysis And Evaluation

CEE 08465:

Prerequisites: CEE 08361 and CEE 08301

The fundamental theme of this course is the engineering study of the mechanical behavior of flexible and rigid pavements.
These include understanding of the pavement response and field performance data, and design of flexible and rigid
pavements. The course will include appropriate computer applications.

END

Introduction to Transportation Systems Modeling

CEE 08466:

Prerequisites: CEE 08361

Introduces latest technologies and techniques used by transportation planners and engineers to study current travel
characteristics and estimate future travel demand and supply. This course focuses on urban travel characteristics and activity
analysis, travel demand and supply analysis, transportation system and project evaluation, and program and project
implementation strategies. The course will (1) introduce concepts, procedures and methods associated with transportation
planning; (2) provide basic knowledge of travel demand forecasting models; and (3) provide basic knowledge of relevant
travel demand modeling software. The course is designed for undergraduate students who want to develop their career in
transportation engineering and planning.

END

Introduction to Transportation Safety Systems

CEE 08467:

Prerequisites: CEE 08361

This course serves as an introductory course in the fundamentals and concepts of transportation safety for Civil
Engineering students

END

Introduction to Intelligent Transportation System

CEE 08468:

This course will introduce Intelligent Transportation System’s (ITS) planning, design, implementation and evaluation
concepts. The course will start with an introduction to systems engineering and fundamentals of ITS followed by detailed
logical and physical architecture development for any ITS project. Furthermore, the course will introduce selected tools
require to plan, design, implement and evaluate ITS projects.

END

Advanced Structural Analysis For Seniors

CEE 08473:

Prerequisites: CEE 08382

The course deals with the matrix method of structural analysis. The topics covered include structural members, member
joints, member end conditions, local and global structural matrices, condensation of global structural matrices, static
structural analysis, and dynamic structural analysis. The course will include appropriate computer applications.

END

Structural Mechanics

CEE 08474:

Prerequisites: (CEE 08383 or ME 10301) and MATH 01235

This course presents the foundations of structural mechanics. Topics include: stress and strain tensors; equilibrium;
compatibility and consecutive relationships; stain energy density; energy methods for solid bodies, frames and trusses; and
techniques for approximate solutions of problems.

END

Fatigue And Fracture

CEE 08475:

Prerequisites: (CEE 08383 or ME 10301) and MATH 01235

This course presents the theory and analytical techniques to design structural components for cyclic loading. Topics
include linear elastic fracture mechanics; S-N fatigue; fatigue crack growth; and algorithms for simulating three-dimensional
crack propagation.

END

Portland Cement Concrete

CEE 08476:

Prerequisites: CEE 08301

The course deals with the proportioning, properties, and performance of different types of portland cement concrete
mixtures. It covers cementitious materials, admixtures, aggregates, microstructure, strength and durability; mixture design,
properties, advanced performance testing of special types of concrete, such as high-strength, lightweight, fiber-reinforced,
and self-consolidating portland cement concretes.

END

Reinforced Concrete Design

CEE 08481:

Prerequisites: CEE 08382

The course deals with the topic of reinforced concrete analysis and design. The analysis and design of reinforced concrete
structural members includes types of concrete and steel, fundamentals of reinforced concrete behavior, analysis and design
of rectangular and T-beams and slabs including flexural and shear behavior, development of reinforcement, deflections and
crack control. Analysis and design of short reinforced concrete columns is also included. The course includes appropriate
computer applications.

END

Steel Design II

CEE 08483:

Prerequisites: CEE 08383

This course addresses advanced topics not covered in a first course in steel design including topics such as design of plate
girders, connections, and structural frames and bracing.

END

Prestressed Concrete For Seniors

CEE 08484:

Prerequisites: CEE 08481

The fundamental theme of this course is the analysis and design of prestressed concrete members for highway bridges,
parking structures, office buildings, and industrial buildings. Topics covered include prestressed construction applications
and materials, flexural analysis of pretensioned and post-tensioning beams, bending and shear design, loss of prestress,
deflection, and composite beams. The course includes appropriate computer applications.

END

Reinforced Concrete Design II

CEE 08485:

Prerequisites: CEE 08481

The fundamental theme of the course is the design and analysis of advanced reinforced concrete structures and structural
components including two-way slabs, footings, retaining walls, shear walls, and slender columns.

END

Bridge Engineering For Seniors

CEE 08486:

Prerequisites: CEE 08382 and CEE 08383

The fundamental theme of the course is the analysis and design of modern steel highway bridges utilizing the bridge code
of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. The topics covered include bridge loads, load
combinations, design methods, reinforced concrete deck slabs, steel wide-flange stringer bridges, steel composite
wide-flange stringer bridges, continuous bridge spans, steel composite plate-girder bridges, elastomeric bearing connections,
steel fixed bridge connections, and steel roller bridge connections. The course includes appropriate computer applications.

END

Design Of Masonry And Wood Structures

CEE 08487:

Prerequisites: CEE 08382

This course provides the fundamentals of structural design using masonry and wood. Topics include materials properties,
flexure, axial loading, and lateral load resisting systems. This course builds upon previously acquired fundamental concepts
of structural analysis and design.

END

Pavement Rehabilitation Method

CEE 08488:

Prerequisites: CEE 08361

This course provides a wide knowledge in pavement distresses and rehabilitation, data collection and monitoring,
pavement performance modeling, and economic analysis. Pavement rehabilitation and management is an essential part of
pavement engineering as it improves the safety of our roadways and preserves our infrastructure assets. This course will
explore the foundations of pavement rehabilitation using field case studies. The course will also include hands-on experience
collecting, recording, and analyzing pavement condition data.

END

Civil Engineering Practice

CEE 08490:

Prerequisites: CEE 08305

This sequence of seminars and workshops is designed to give civil engineering students meaningful exposure to several
critical topics related to the real-world practice of civil engineering. Topics covered will include bid specifications and
documents, contracts and performance bonds, engineering estimates and cost engineering, engineering management and
project scheduling, and professional ethics and responsibilities.

END

Civil Engineering Design Project I

CEE 08491:

Prerequisites: (CEE 08322 or CEE 08383 or 08351) and (CEE 08361 or CEE 08311)

This is the first course in a sequence of two courses that will provide a meaningful design experience for teams of
undergraduate civil engineering students under the direction of two or more faculty advisers. The sequence will include a
thorough literature search and review, the development of a clear and concise problem statement, consultations with other
faculty and industry experts, and the derivation of publishable results. The project will culminate in a final written report
and oral presentation.

END

Civil Engineering Design Project II

CEE 08492:

Prerequisites: CEE 08491

This is the second course in a sequence of two courses that will provide a meaningful design experience for teams of
undergraduate civil engineering students under the direction of two or more faculty advisers. The sequence will include a
thorough literature search and review, the development of a clear and concise problem statement, consultations with other
faculty and industry experts, and the derivation of publishable results. The project will culminate in a final written report
and oral presentation.

END

CEE 08493:

This course is designed to introduce students to emerging topics in the Civil and Environmental Engineering field.
Consent of the instructor is necessary, and prerequisites are determined by the nature of the topic.

Selected Topics In Civil And Environmental Engineering

END

Advanced Fatigue And Fracture

CEE 08575:

This course presents the theory and analytical techniques to design structural components for cyclic loading. Topics
include linear elastic fracture mechanics; S-N fatigue; fatigue crack growth; and algorithms for simulating three-dimensional
crack propagation. The course culminates with an original research project, resulting in both oral and written reports.

END

Viscoelasticity

ENGR 01480:

This course covers the fundamentals of linear and non-linear viscoelastic behavior of materials: constitutive modeling,
experimental development of material properties, and solution of classic problems. Non-linear viscoelasticity and the effect
of temperature on non-linear viscoelastic properties are presented. Standard experimental methods to characterize
determine viscoelastic properties are discussed. Classic solutions, and the use of time-temperature superposition of
solutions, are presented. This course might not be offered annually.

END

CADD I

SET 01103:

This course introduces students to computer-aided drafting and design (CADD) with AutoCAD software. Students learn
to create, store and retrieve drawings on AutoCAD. Industry standards and procedures are used to develop the students'
skills and proficiency in CADD.

END

Introduction to Surveying

SET 01108:

Prerequisites: MATH 01122

This course is a systematic study of the basic principles of plane surveying. Topics include field practice, office procedures
and familiarization with various surveying instruments, (transit, theodolite, EDM, total station, automatic-level and
laser-level). Traversing, triangulation and leveling are also studied.

END

CADD II

SET 01113:

This course is a continuation of the study of AutoCAD. Topics include block, attribute, importing and exporting, x-ref,
the user coordinate system and the basics of three-dimensional construction. Extensive hands-on projects using AutoCAD
are required.

END

Codes, Contracts and Specifications

SET 01201:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111

This course is a study of business and professional relations in architecture and engineering. Topics include law of
contracts, torts, agency, the independent contractor, real property liens, partnerships and corporations. Also included are
litigation, arbitration of disputes, labor laws in construction work, bidding procedures and specification writing.

END

3-D Modeling

SET 01203:

Prerequisites: SET 01113

This course provides advanced computer-aided drafting and design (CADD) techniques. A variety of design and drafting
problems are studied using AutoCAD. Students generate drawings in such areas as architectural, mechanical, civil, piping,
structural and pictorial drafting. These projects involve: three-dimensional construction, surfaces, solids, rendering and
animation.

END

Evidence and Procedures for Boundary Location

SET 01206:

Prerequisites: SET 01108

This course presents a systematic study of the applications of the laws of boundaries and evidence necessary for boundary
determination. The history and development of land boundaries, the surveyor's role in court, court procedures and legal
elements of surveying are studied.

END

Hydraulics

SET 01207:

Prerequisites: MATH 01122

This course is a study of the behaviors of fluids under static and dynamic conditions. Attention is given to buoyancy and
stability of floating bodies. The use of Bernoulli's equation for calculations of flow through pipes, orifices and open channels
is covered. This is a non-calculus based treatment of the subject and this course is not a substitute for ENGR 01342
Engineering Fluid Mechanics or ENGR 01341 Fluid Mechanics.

END

Route and Construction Surveying

SET 01208:

Prerequisites: SET 01108

This course is a systematic study of road layout including parabolic curves, circular curves and cross-sections. Field and
office practices in various methods of establishing horizontal and vertical control for mapping and planning as applied to
different construction projects are discussed. Other topics include determination of earth quantities, slope staking and the
use of the stereometer in interpreting aerial photographs. Students receive hands-on experience with various surveying
instruments, data collectors and computers to develop skills in the field-to-finish concepts for surveying and engineering
operations.

END

Map Projections and Coordinate Systems

SET 01209:

Prerequisites: SET 01108 and MATH 01130

This course will introduce students to map projections and their associated coordinate systems with emphasis on the (PA
and NJ) State Plane Coordinate Systems. The course will cover reduction of surveying observations to map projection
systems in detail and focus on the conversion of survey data from one coordinate system to another, Topics will include
among other things, projection systems used in survey computations to convert ellipsoidal/spheroidal Earth measurements
onto a plane surface including Lambert, Mercator, Transverse Mercator, and UTM map projections, Direct and Indirect
methods for coordinate conversion, reduction of surveying observations.

END

Legal Aspects of Surveying

SET 01301:

Prerequisites: SET 01206

This course covers land surveyor ethics and professional responsibility, real property law, real and record evidence,
conveyances, recording systems, legal aspects of boundary establishment, unwritten title, easements, prescription, water
boundaries, surveying plans, and the surveyor in court.

END

Adjustment Computations

SET 01302:

Prerequisites: GEOG 16160 AND SET 01108

Adjustment computations covers the basic theory and mechanics of a least squares adjustment using the traditional
surveying observations of distances, angles, azimuths, and elevation differences. The theory of error propagation is used to
determine the precision of indirectly measured quantities. Post-adjustment analysis is studied through the use of various
statistical tests, and error ellipse computation and analysis.

END

Boundaries and Adjacent Properties

SET 01303:

Prerequisites: SET 01206

A course on legal principles regarding boundaries and the constructive solutions of the problems of boundary surveying by
a consideration of deed descriptions and examples of their application to surveying.

END

Digital Practices in Surveying

SET 01304:

Prerequisites: SET 01113 AND SET 01208

In this course students will be taught skills in using robotic and digital geospacial data collection technologies for mapping,
data preparation and processing, and using Computer Aided Drafting (CAD) methods for presentation.

END

Boundary Line Analysis

SET 01305:

Prerequisites: SET 01303

A course that develops the analytical synthesis of real property law, land surveying procedures, and scenario development
compatible with current case law decisions for the development of most probable scenarios of boundary location for the
court's consideration.

END

Large Scale Topographic Surveying

SET 01306:

Prerequisites: SET 01108 and SET 01103

This course covers application of the theory and practice of the broad spectrum of traditional land surveying processes
from project planning, control surveying, feature surveying, data processing and map making. Accuracy assessment and data
analysis processes are discussed to ensure that the finished product meets expected accuracy standards. During field
practical exercises, students use GNSS equipment to establish survey control networks on a project site and use total
stations and electronic data collectors for feature coding and surveying. Industry standard data processing software is used
to process the data and apply State Plane Coordinate system to produce deliverables. A report of the survey will be produced
together with the map products.

END

Photogrammetry

SET 01307:

Prerequisites: SET 01209 and GEOG 16160 and GEOG 16375

This course covers the basics of interpretative and geometric aspects of photogrammetry as the art and science of making
maps from aerial photographs including manned aircrafts and satellites. Geometric and physical optics, and sensor types and
characteristics are discussed. Geometric properties of vertical photography and the science of producing orthorectified
images and creating topographic maps from rectified block of stereo photographs. Students apply analytical methods in
performing interior orientation, absolute orientation, coordinate transformation, and aero-triangulation of the stereo
photographs. Softcopy photogrammetric processing methods are introduced.

END

Surveying From Unmanned Aerial Systems

SET 01308:

Prerequisites: SET 01307 or SET 01209 or Instructor Permission

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles or Drones have become popular for many civilian applications including recreational,
emergency search and rescue, real estate, project monitoring, surveying and mapping, and many more. Acquisition of a
system may be the easy part of the entire process of running an UAS. There is quite a large amount of information now
available on the UAS. However, most of such information focuses on either the engineering aspect of the aircraft or its
defense applications. Very little information is available on the geo-spatial utilization of an UAS data although they are
becoming popular platforms for applications in surveying and mapping data acquisition. This course focuses on the
components, operations, FAA rules and regulations, and civilian applications in geospatial industries with emphasis on
surveying and mapping

END

Geodetic Control Surveying

SET 01401:

Prerequisites: SET 01108

In this course students study the higher order methods and techniques of establishing control in surveying systems such as
Global Positioning System (GPS). The course addresses observations using High Accuracy Reference Networks (HARNs),
1st, 2nd and 3rd Orders of accuracy and the computations necessary to reduce these observations to measurements and the
applications of these measurements to the State Plane Coordinate systems and the geoid.

END

Professional Practice in Surveying

SET 01402:

This course provides meaningful exposure to professional practice issues in surveying. Topics covered include professional
licensure, contracts and performance bonds, marketing, regulatory issues, surveyor-client relationships, the surveyor as
expert witness, and professional ethics and responsibilities.

END

Fundamentals of Geodesy

SET 01403:

Prerequisites: SET 001401

Topics in geometric geodesy include definitions and the geometry of the reference ellipsoid that approximates the real
Earth's physical and dynamic characteristics and computations of geodetic coordinates on a reference ellipsoid and map
projections. Concepts on map projections include properties and characteristics of most common map projections (and
distortions) and geodetic field survey data reduction and computation on State Plane Coordinate Systems. Topics in the
physical geodesy and basic concepts of positioning using other advanced space-based technologies such as satellite laser
ranging and satellite altimetry are also discussed.

END

Terrestrial Laser Scanning

SET 01404:

Prerequisites: SET 01306 and SET 01307

This course covers the use of terrestrial laser scanner for surveying purposes. The course begins with an understanding of
evolution of the laser as a sensing technology. It continues with the geometric applications leading to data processing and
point cloud aggregation. Georeferencing and coordinate transformation of point clouds are performed, after which shapes,
and dimensions of features are extracted. Two dimensional maps can be created from the extracted features. Data quality
and Accuracy analysis are performed and errors and blunders are identified and removed. Digital Terrain Models (DTM)
and Digital Surface Models DSM) are developed from the point clouds from which volumes of excavation on construction
or mining sites, volumes of subsidence can be determined. Interpretation and identification of features will be performed on
the point clouds based on the reflectance characteristics of the point clouds.

END

Precise Positioning and Data Analysis

SET 01405:

Prerequisites: SET 01302 and SET 01403

Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) have revolutionized global positioning and navigation. In particular, the
technology has improved our understanding of the Earth’s gravitational forces and their influence on precise positioning.
The precision of positioning and navigation has improved considerably and GNSS receivers have become the preferred tool
for survey control networks and other activities requiring higher order accuracies. Employers expect surveying graduates to
become proficient in the use of the technology as well as having sound understanding of the underlying science. This course
covers satellite orbits, data transmission and processing, the theory behind GNSS technology and applies knowledge of
geodesy and data analysis to position fixing. Blunder detection principles are applied to remove errors and to improve the
quality of the results. Students use the GNSS equipment in field laboratory exercises for static, Real-Time kinematics
methods of data acquisition. It is expected that upon completion of this course, students will fully equipped with the
knowledge to be abreast with latest applications of GNSS technology.

END

Parcel-Based Information Systems

SET 01406:

Prerequisites: SET 01206 and GEOG 16260

People and cultures around the world have different perceptions of land. Land has different value to many people. As a
natural resource, with finite size, there are always competing interests when it comes to allocation use and management of
units of land. With so many competing interests, it is important to manage land and its resources in an effective manner to
ensure its sustainability. To ensure proper stewardship of land, data about each land parcel must be maintained so that
information from parcel –based geodatabases may be used to support decisions involving land, people, and communities.
Parcel-based information technology serves as a component of the geospatial technology with special applications in
placed-based information to support social and economic develop of any community. In this course students learn the need
to manage land and natural resources for sustainable development and how effective land information management is the
foundation of social and economic development.

END

Surveying Engineering Technology Capstone Course

SET 01490:

Prerequisites: SET 01305 AND SET 01302 AND SET 01401

This course provides a culminating and integrating experience to develop student competency in both technical and
non-technical skills in solving surveying problems. A class project integrates many components of previous surveying
coursework and emphasizes working with others on a long term project: project description, project planning, field
collection, office processing, computer-aided drafting, final product preparation, and oral presentation of results.

END

Introduction To Communication Studies

CMS 04200:

Introduction to Communication Studies introduces students to the field of Communication Studies by examining the
various disciplines within the field. Such disciplines include interpersonal communication, communication ethics, health
communication, family communication, organizational communication, intercultural communication, rhetorical studies,
media studies, and others. The course also looks at the similarities and differences among the disciplines.

END

Public Speaking

CMS 04205:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course trains students in the fundamentals of public speaking, including study and practice of speech preparation and
speech delivery. The goal is to enable the student to participate effectively in oral communication, as a student,
professionally and as a citizen.

END

Digital Presentations

CMS 04206:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or ENGR 01201 or HONR 01112

This course covers the fundamentals of presentations and meetings in digital contexts with attention to both the speaker
and audience perspectives. Although the course will instruct students in the use of current technological platforms to
organize presentations and meetings, emphasis will be placed on effective message construction and critical interpretation.
Students will learn how to conduct audience analyses, build audience interest, and strategically research and use supporting
materials in digital presentations and meetings while maintaining ethical responsibilities. The ultimate goal of the course is
to prepare students to participate effectively and ethically in digital discourse, such that they can be impactful professionals
and citizens.

END

Business and Professional Communication

CMS 04208:

Prerequisites: CMS 04205

This course offers a unique emphasis on communication in the workplace. Techniques for negotiating communication in
today’s ever-changing business world will be focused on, with attention to business communication concepts. These
concepts range from management and leadership models to ethics in message communication. Significant attention to
various aspects of business presentations and interviewing strategies help to prepare students for success regardless of their
past experience.

END

CMS 04210:

Mass Media And Their Influences

Prerequisites: ENGL 05105 or COMP 01112 or ENGR 01201 or permission of instructor

This course studies the impact on our daily lives of television, radio, films, magazines and newspapers. Students examine
how the media influence politics, purchases, and entertainment, and how the media affect the culture in shaping beliefs and
attitudes. It discusses how each of the media operates and what each accomplishes. This course examines the gap between
real life and "mediated" reality.

END

Mass Media And Their Influences - Wi

CMS 04211:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or ENGR 01201 or permission of instructor

This is a writing intensive course that studies the impact on our daily lives of television, radio, films, magazines, and
newspapers. Students examine how the media influence politics, purchases, and entertainment, and how the media affect
the culture in shaping beliefs and attitudes. It discusses how each of the media operates and what each accomplishes. This
course examines the gap between real life and "mediated" reality.

END

Fiction To Film

CMS 04215:

Prerequisites: 30 credits required

This course provides comparative study of film and literature. Students learn the critical vocabulary of literature and film
and enhance their understanding of both art forms. The course covers American and foreign works.

END

Interpersonal Communication

CMS 04220:

Students explore the basic theories and concepts of interpersonal communication research. Some areas to be covered
include perception and social cognition, the relationship of culture to interpersonal communication, self-perception and
communication, interpersonal systems, sex/gender and interpersonal communication, and interpersonal communication
contexts (i.e., family, friendship, romance).

END

Sports Communication, Culture & Identity

CMS 04223:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course focuses on how race, class, gender, sexuality, and ability are viewed, discussed, and performed in athletics.
Concentrating on examining various areas in the field, the class will address depictions of athletes in the media, equity
issues, as well as the behaviors of consumers, among many other aspects.

END

Semantics

CMS 04225:

Prerequisites: 30 credits required

This course makes students aware of the relationship between language and human behavior and of the use and abuse of
verbal and non-verbal language. It emphasizes meaning, the classification and abstraction processes and the application of
semantic principles to the language of literature, politics, advertising and prejudice.

END

Semantics - WI

CMS 04226:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or ENGR 01201 + 30 credits required

This is a writing intensive course that makes students aware of the relationship between language and human behavior and
of the use and abuse of verbal and non-verbal language. It emphasizes meaning, the classification and abstraction processes
and the application of semantic principles to the language of literature, politics, advertising and prejudice.

END

Small Group Communication

CMS 04240:

This course focuses on the principles and theories of communication as they relate to the small group process. It deals with
the barriers to effective group discussion and leadership with corresponding remedial measures, as well as an application of
small group research as it pertains to hypothetical and actual small group situations.

END

Small Group Communication - WI

CMS 04241:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or ENGR 01201

This is a writing intensive course that focuses on the principles and theories of communication as they relate to the small
group process. It deals with the barriers to effective small group discussion and leadership with corresponding remedial
measures as well as an application of small group research as it pertains to hypothetical and actual small group situations.

END

Communication Theory

CMS 04250:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or ENGR 01201 or permission of instructor

This sophomore-level course acquaints students with current theories as they apply to a variety of communication
environments. Drawing upon a wealth of timely research, students study theories relating to interpersonal, small group,
organizational, public and mass communication. The course presents theories through readings as well as extensive class
discussion.

END

Nonverbal Communication

CMS 04255:

This course will introduce students to the theories and applications of nonverbal communication across different contexts,
such as interpersonal, health, mass media, work, and intercultural. The topics studied will include messages of and about the
human body; approach-avoidance signals of space, gaze, and touch; facial expressions; and the overlapping channels of voice
and gesture.

END

Organizational Communication Theory And Research

CMS 04260:

Prerequisites: Comp 01112 or ENGR 01201

Organizational Communication theory and research introduces students to the basics of organizational communication.
The class will focus on how scholars and researchers study and understand the communication patterns and relationships
that go on in organizations. Students will be asked to consider a variety of perspectives and theories of organizational
communication while comparing them to each other and to their own experiences as organizational actors.

END

CMS 04270:

This course surveys theories and theorists dealing with the area of persuasion, beginning with the Classical Age and
extending through present-day empirical research. It emphasizes applying the theories to practical situations and goals.

Persuasion And Social Influence

END

CMS 04290:

Rhetorical Theory

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or ENGR 01201

Rhetorical Theory introduces students to the concept of rhetoric and how it has been theorized from antiquity to the
present. The course provides students with a systematic history of rhetorical theory and spotlights significant theorists such
as Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, Blair and Burke. Students will explore how both ancient and contemporary theories of rhetoric
apply to contemporary society.

END

Advanced Public Speaking

CMS 04305:

Prerequisites: CMS 06202 or CMS 04205 or permission of instructor

Students analyze the special problems of advanced speech composition and delivery through discussion and platform
appearance. In addition to strengthening students' command of the fundamentals of public speaking, this course gives
attention to rhetorical style and specialized types of speaking situations. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Images Of Gender In Popular Culture

CMS 04310:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course examines the concept of gender as it is rhetorically constructed in contemporary popular culture. Students will
analyze how various cultural texts (such as advertisements, popular songs, television shows, or video games) communicate
what it means to be masculine and feminine in U.S. culture. The course will examine how these images have changed
historically and how depictions of race, class, and sexual identity also contribute to our understandings of gender in popular
culture.

END

Environmental Communication

CMS 04313:

This course focuses on the social construction of nature, as well as how environmental knowledge and constructs are
communicated among mass media, the public, organizations, and the scientific communities. Topics to be explored include
discursive and visual communication of environmental issues and nature, environmental frames in media, constructs of
animals and wilderness, politics, environmental justice, green advertising, environmental controversies and more.

END

Digital Media Processes

CMS 04315:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course examines the social, economic, and cultural implications of the use of digital media. Students taking this course
will learn how to critically analyze digital platforms including Google, social media, and video games. The course includes
analyses of data infrastructures, socio-cultural implications of data collection and content targeting, and breakdowns of how
digital structures function.

END

Mediated Interpersonal Communication

CMS 04316:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112, or HONR 01112, or ENGR 01201, orENGL 01112

The study of mediated interpersonal communication focuses on the role that communication technologies play in meaning
making within interpersonal communication contexts, such as personal, family, community, and professional relationships.
The purpose of the course will be to discuss the history and changing meaning of mediated interpersonal communication,
survey relevant theoretical perspectives in the research literature, and apply those perspectives in contemporary issues. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

Social Media Strategies

CMS 04317:

Prerequisites: CMS 04205

This course focuses on strategies for building a community online through social media platforms. It includes a service
learning component that allows students to apply what they are learning to a management campaign for a local nonprofit or
startup organization. Students will learn how to research clients, research competitors, understand the relevant social media
landscape, devise goals, choose platforms, create content, link social media, understand native and external metrics, and
assess their success.

END

Leadership Communication

CMS 04318:

This course surveys theories of leadership communication and looks at leaders from different fields, including business,
political, social, religious, and cultural, analyzing their ethical communication, and their vision and transformational
influence. The course provides a basic introduction to leadership by focusing on the social construction of leaders and
followers. The course will examine topics such as: the nature of leadership, theories of communication and leadership,
communication ethics in leadership, creating a vision, communication leadership globally, and leadership for the greater
good. The course will combine the theory and practice of leadership communication by having an applied component, such
as case study analyses of “real world” leaders, and personal reflection of students’ leadership communication skills. Attention
will be given to helping students to understand and improve their own leadership performance.

END

Organizational Communication in Sports

CMS 04319:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course juxtaposes the organization structure and communication of sports and sport industries with those of
traditional corporations. It examines organizational, group, and interpersonal communication theories to explain how sport
works, and ultimately, how it can work better. Given the strong cultural emphasis on the individual in sport, the course
explores how interpersonal and organizational communication impact various stakeholders.

END

Communicating Gender

CMS 04320:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or ENGR 01201

Communicating Gender will consider the theory, research, and experience of the intersection between gender and
communication. Focus will be given to the ways in which gender, as a concept and set of expectations, is created through
communication. Students will also consider their own individual experiences as gendered communicators while studying the
varying perspectives of communication studies scholars with regard to this phenomenon.

END

Images of Athletes in Popular Culture

CMS 04323:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course examines images of athletes and athletics as they are rhetorically constructed in contemporary popular culture.
Students will analyze how various cultural texts (such as magazine covers, advertisements, television shows, films, or video
games) communicate what it means to be an athlete in both the U.S. and internationally. The course will examine how these
images have changed historically and how depictions of gender, race, class, and sexual identity also contribute to our
understandings of what it means to be an athlete in popular culture.

END

Linguistics

CMS 04325:

Students study the nature of human language by examining four major components: phonology, semantics, syntax, and
morphology. Linguistics principally emphasizes linguistic universals, characteristics which all human languages share.
Students discuss dialect formation, first-language acquisition in children, and animal communication systems. Students also
compare modern linguistic theories.

END

Women and Nonbinary Identities in Sports Communication

CMS 04327:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

Women and nonbinary athletes have long been marginalized and underrepresented in organized sport, including
domestically in the United States, and on an international scale. This course examines the communication, representation,
depiction, and construction of women and nonbinary identities within sports from a rhetorical perspective, highlighting
historical, cultural, and social contexts and analyzing the background and participation of individuals who encompass these
identities as athletes, coaches, media members, in front offices, and more.

END

International Media Communication

CMS 04330:

This course examines systems of communication from a global perspective, analyzing the historical, cultural, and
philosophical influences that have shaped those systems. The course enables students to analyze the systemic effects of
globalization, new technologies, regulation, efforts of various groups to control development of communication structures,
inequities in communication infrastructure, so-called cultural imperialism, and the linkage between international media and
diplomacy, economics, and politics.

END

Special Topics in Sports Communication

CMS 04333:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course provides students with an opportunity to thoroughly investigate specific areas critical to the field of
communication and sport. Course topics change as new trends develop and as student interest necessitates scheduling.
Topics are selected on the basis of timeliness and the availability of expert staff. General topics are announced as the course
is scheduled.

END

Introduction To Survey Research

CMS 04335:

Prerequisites: 60 credits required

This course provides students with an understanding of research in general and survey research in particular. Theory is
applied through emphasis on survey design, sampling, interviewing, tabulating and analysis of data. Students learn the "whys"
and "hows" of public opinion polling by doing an actual survey.

END

Family Communication

CMS 04340:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or ENGR 01210

This course focuses on how scholars and researchers study and understand the communication patterns and relationships
in families. Family types, roles, and ongoing communication processes are discussed. Students are asked to consider a variety
of prospectives and theories of family communication while comparing them to each other and to their own experiences as
family members.

END

Argumentation And Debate

CMS 04345:

Prerequisites: CMS 06202 or CMS 04205 or permission of instructor

This course focuses on the principles and techniques of argumentative speaking and formal debating. Students study types
and tests of evidence and reasoning, and develop skills in logical persuasion, cross examination, intensive research, case
preparation, and critical listening. This course may not be offered annually.

END

CMS 04350:

Communication Studies Research Methods

Prerequisites: CMS 01220 or CMS 04200 and CMS 01300 or CMS 04250

This course introduces the student to quantitative and qualitative research methods used in communication studies.
Students will learn about research procedures, identification and definition of variables, sampling methods, and basic
statistical methods such as discourse analysis, correlational analysis, parametric and non-parametric tests, and descriptive
techniques. Students will become familiar with current communication studies research and will design and complete a
research project.

END

Communication Studies Internship I

CMS 04355:

Prerequisites: 75 credits required and CommunicationStudies Major with 2.5 Major GPA

Under professional supervision in the field, students practice theories and skills learned in the classroom. 

END

Communication Studies Internship II

CMS 04356:

Prerequisites: 75 credits required and CommunicationStudies Major with 2.5 Major GPA

Under professional supervision in the field, students practice theories and skills learned in the classroom.

END

Communication Studies Internship III

CMS 04357:

Prerequisites: 75 credits required and CommunicationStudies Major with 2.5 Major GPA

Under professional supervision in the field, students practice theories and skills learned in the classroom.

END

Intercultural Communication

CMS 04360:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or ENGR 01201

Intercultural Communication will consider the theory, research, and experience of intercultural communication. The
nature of culture and its relationship to communication will be discussed. Students will be asked to consider their own
experiences as intercultural communicators while studying the varying perspectives of communication studies scholars with
regards to this phenomenon.

END

CMS 04365:

Research Practicum In Communication Studies

Prerequisites: Completion of 75 credits required, approval of Communication Studies Department advisor.

Research Practicum in Communication Studies allows students to apply the theories and methodology learned in
Communication Studies courses to a research partnership with a member of the department faculty. Students earn 1 credit
for every 40 hours of work, with most practica implemented for 3 credit hours. Students keep a detailed log of working
hours, prepare a portfolio representative of their practicum experience, write an analytical critique of the practicum, and are
evaluated by their faculty partner as well as the practicum supervisor. To receive approval for this course, students must have
a minimum 2.5 grade point average.

END

Political Communication

CMS 04370:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or ENGR 01201 and POSC 07100 or POSC 07110 or POSC 07200

Political Communication investigates the many and varied understandings of how "the political" functions symbolically in
contemporary society. Most broadly the course further develops students' appreciation for the inherently political
relationship between language and meaning. More specifically, it focuses on the intersections of public, political discourse,
representations and manifestations of the tensions between liberalism and democracy, the performance of citizenship, and
civic responsibility.

END

Special Topics In Communication

CMS 04375:

This course provides students with an opportunity to thoroughly investigate specific areas critical to the field of
communication. Course topics change as new trends develop and as student interest necessitates scheduling. Topics are
selected on the basis of timeliness and the availability of expert staff. General topics are announced as the course is
scheduled. This course is not offered annually.

END

Health Communication

CMS 04380:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course will address the topic of health as it is enacted and defined in communication. Specific topics to be
discussed are doctor-patient interaction, social and cultural issues of health, mass media representations of health and
healthy behaviors, along with communication within health organizations.

END

Communication in Health Campaigns and Interventions

CMS 04382:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

Communication in Health Campaigns and Interventions provides an overview of the theories and practices in the design,
execution, and evaluation of health communication campaigns and interventions. Students will examine health promotion
strategies used in national renowned mass media campaigns and new media campaigns, as well as in community-based and
interpersonal-level health interventions. Students will gain hands-on experience in campaign development and message
design when they complete a course project on the topic they choose.

END

Constructing Health

CMS 04385:

Constructing Health will address the various communicative means by which the concept and structure of "health" is
socially defined. Students taking this course will study the constructs of health, medicine, the body, and normalcy as enacted
in rhetorical, mediated, organizational and interpersonal communication examplars. The relationship between power and
these constructions is also interrogated.

END

Rhetorical Criticism

CMS 04390:

Prerequisites: CMS 06202

This course surveys ancient to modern theories of speech criticism to develop defensible criteria for evaluating speeches,
social movements, and non-oratorical events. Students study and evaluate past and present public speeches by applying
various rhetorical standards. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Rhetoric of Science, Technology, and Medicine-Writing Intensive

CMS 04393:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course covers the history of the field of RSTM and its major theoretical frameworks. Students perform their own
studies to offer suggestions for improved communication strategies. Identity and ideology in scientific, technological, and
medical discourses are highlighted throughout.

END

Rhetoric of Sport

CMS 04395:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course examines the ancient connection between the art of rhetoric and the vocation of athletics. Students will
explore the rhetorical dimensions of sport and sport culture using various rhetorical methodologies, such as metaphor,
genre, or feminist criticism. Additionally, students will analyze the rhetorical form and function of variety of sports texts,
both historical and contemporary.

END

Independent Study - Communication Studies

CMS 04405:

Prerequisites: department permission

This course provides students with an opportunity to work independently on specialized communication topics under the
guidance of a faculty member. Generally, this course may not be substituted for any course offered by a department in the
College of Communication. In addition to departmental permission, approval by the dean is also required.

END

Ethical Issues in Human Communication

CMS 04425:

Prerequisites: 90 credit hours

Ethical Issues in Human Communication will address numerous ethical conundrums in our communicative activities.
Specific ethical systems provide the groundwork for application to interpersonal, organizational, intercultural, political and
rhetorical communication contexts. Case studies and class discussions will be used to encourage students to develop their
own ethical frameworks for communication contexts.

END

Rhetoric of Reality Television

CMS 04440:

Prerequisite: COMP 01112 or HONR 01111 or ENGR 01102
This course examines rhetorical dimensions of the reality television genre. Students will analyze the various subgenres
constituting Reality TV, with particular attention given to how such shows critique and/or validate certain identity
positions in Western culture, including gender, gender identity, race, class, sexual orientation, and regional identity.
Students will explore concepts of authenticity, truth, and suspension of disbelief as they relate to a television format based in
documenting the “real.”

END

Seminar In Communication Studies - Wi

CMS 04450:

Prerequisites: CMS 04350 and CMS 04390 with a grade of C- or higher and Senior standing in the Communication Studies

This writing intensive course provides a seminar experience in areas of communication that are not part of the regular
course offerings. Examples of potential topics include Friendship, Rhetoric of Music, Romantic Relationships, and
Presidential Campaigns.

END

Senior Transition

CMS 04455:

Prerequisites: CMS 04450 or (Corequisites) and Communication Studies major

This course asks Communication Studies majors to gather representative works from their major and reflect on them in
light of the department's goals. It also provides preparation for post graduation work in their filed through specific
discussion of graduate school and job attainment.

END

Introduction to Health and Science Communication

HSC 08100:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 OR HONR 01112 OR ENGR 01201

Students are introduced to the ways in which people communicate about health and illness, environmental risk, and
science policy. This is the required introductory course for the program in the Health and Science Communication (HSC).
The course is open to non-majors.

END

Developing Health and Scientific Literacy

HSC 08200:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

Developing Health and Scientific Literacies will help students navigate scientific and medical scholarship to better
understand cutting edge research into issues that affect all of humanity, such as climate change and genetic engineering. In
this course, students will learn to identify, evaluate, and report on scholarly sources, gaining comfort with reading and
understanding technical language. Students will learn about how scientific and medical scholarship is produced and
circulated, and what institutions, practices, and ethical standards influence those processes. Students will practice reading
and summarizing scholarly sources, as well as translating them for lay audiences. Students will also learn to engage health and
scientific scholarship for its intersections with social concerns and communal values.

END

Special Topics in Health and Science Communication

HSC 08350:

This course will allow students studying Health and Science Communication the opportunity to investigate specific topics
areas within these major disciplines. The course will be made up of lectures, class discussions, and a variety of assignments
involving health and science communication. Areas of study would cover major trends and other developments within these
disciplines, such as climate change, nanotechnology, genetics, or the cultural competence of health communication.

END

Senior Seminar in Health and Science Communication

HSC 08450:

Prerequisites: minimum 90 earned hours AND (HSC 08100 AND HSC 08200) AND (CMS 04350 OR CMS 04390 OR PR 06310
OR JRN 02363 OR WA 01201)

In this seminar students will integrate what they have learned as Health and Science Communication majors by creating a
culminating, researched project. Students will produce a work that draws on the theoretical foundations of the field, that
demonstrates a keen understanding of their audience, and that follows disciplinary standards and reflects their chosen
concentrations. Students will share their final products during a symposium where they will represent their work visually and
orally.

END

Computer Science Learning Community

CS 00100:

One semester requirement for all students who enter the major.

END

Computer Science Principles

CS 01101:

This course introduces students to the foundational concepts of computer science and challenges them to explore how
computing and technology can impact the world. More than a traditional introduction to programming, it is a rigorous,
engaging, and approachable course that explores many of the foundational ideas of computing so all students understand
how these concepts are transforming the world we live in. Topics covered include creativity and innovation, abstraction,
data and Information (e.g., the role of data analytics), algorithms, programming, the Internet and the global impact of
computing. This course is designed to map to the relatively new high school Advance Placement course and exam.

END

Introduction To Programming

CS 01102:

This course acquaints students with the logical structure of a computer, the algorithmic formulation of problems, and a
modern high-level programming language. Extensive programming experience is included in the course. Proficiency
equivalent to Basic Algebra II (MATH01.195) is expected for this course.

END

CS 01104:

This course emphasizes algorithmic solutions of problems. The syntax of the programming language is also studied, as well
as the writing of structured code. Proficiency equivalent to Basic Algebra II.

Introduction to Programming and Problem Solving

END

Web Literacy

CS 01105:

This is an introductory course on the world wide web, exposing how it works, and showing students how to use it
appropriately. This course teaches students to create and modify basic web pages with markup languages and style
directives, and how to embed non-text information such as video, images, and sound. The principles of publishing websites
on the Internet and the process by which a page is delivered to end users will also be covered.

END

Computing Environments

CS 01110:

Students will be exposed to a variety of computing environments. The course will include extensive hands-on of a variety of
software applications. Topics covered will include user tools, user programming techniques, application packages, and
networking communications. Students will gain an understanding of the principles of computing which will enable them to
adapt to future technological developments. A solid and fundamental understanding of computers and current operating
systems, word processing and spreadsheet software are essential to this course.

END

Introduction To Computer Game Modeling

CS 01190:

This is an introductory computer games modeling course which examines the basics of computer game design and visual
effects. Students will use graphics software modeling packages to create characters and visual effects, and to develop a
computer game idea, including storyline and plots. Elementary programming techniques may also be taught.

END

Computer Laboratory Techniques

CS 01205:

Prerequisites: CS 04113 or CS 04103; and Sophomore Standing

A practical introduction to the hardware, software and networks used by the Computer Science Department. A
foundation in programming using the language or languages required for intermediate and advanced computer science
courses will be included.

END

Principles Of Information Security

CS 01211:

Students will be exposed to the spectrum of security activities, methods, technologies, and threats. This course will cover a
range of key topics in the area of information and computer security including inspection and protection of information
assets, detection of and reaction to security threats, taxonomy of security threats, and concentrating on issues in computer
and operating systems security, principles of network security, and basics of cryptography.

END

Special Topics in Computer Science

CS 01295:

Restricted to CS Majors and Minors
Specific topical outline to be covered will vary depending upon the topic chosen for the course and will be clearly stated on
the coruse syllabus.

END

Topics In Computer Science

CS 01395:

Prerequisites: CS 04222 or CS 04225

This course enables the faculty to offer courses in advanced topics which are not offered on a regular basis. pre-reqs
will vary according to the specific topic being studied.

END

CS 01400:

Independent Study

END

Bioinformatics - Advanced Computational Aspects

CS 01541:

This course introduces the advanced student to the computer hardware, software, algorithms and statistical packages that
are used in computational aspects of bioinformatics. Hardware topics include multiprocessor clusters, high performance
computing, and parallelism. Software topics include message passing and shared memory styles of parallel/concurrent
programming languages, databases, avalilable software packages, and visualization techniques for large data sets. Algorithms
and statistical packages include those for the studey of molecular biology, evolution, structural biology, and biological
networks. Students will design and carry out an independent research project using and developing appropriate
bioinformatics algorithms, software and/or hardware. Undergraduate preparation in Calculus, Statistics (preferably
Biostatistics), and Introduction to Computer Programming is strongly suggested.

END

Big Data Tools and Techniques

CS 02421:

Prerequisites: CS 10337 or MIS 02337 or CS 04430 or (CS 10338 and CS 10339)

Big data refers to the large, diverse sets of information that grow at ever-increasing rates. It encompasses the volume of
information, the velocity or speed at which it is created and collected, and the variety or scope of the data points being
covered. Big data often comes from multiple sources and arrives in multiple formats. This course discusses various tools for
loading, storing, visualizing and analyzing Big-Data sets.

END

Information Visualization

CS 02570:

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR the MS Data Science program OR the COGS in
Computational Data Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This is a graduate level course in Information Visualization. Topics covered include graphics programming, information
visualization general principles, visualization techniques for 1-dimensional, 2-dimensional, and N-dimensional information,
graph visualization, visualization techniques for image and digital libraries, as well as for the World Wide Web, interactivity,
theories behind information visualization, and focus+context techniques. This course also includes the implementation of
techniques presented in lecture. Students are encouraged to devise new techniques, implement them, and determine their
effectiveness. Students will be required to complete in-depth assignments, read, summarize, and present recent journal
papers from the information visualization literature, and prepare term papers with regard to an information visualization
research topic. Students will also be required to specify, design, implement, and document a semester-long software project
related to information visualization.

END

Computer Science And Programming

CS 04103:

Prerequisites: MATH 01122 OR MATH 01130 OR CS 01104

This course emphasizes programming methodology, algorithms and simple data structures. Topics to be covered include
top down design of functions and classes, basic data abstraction and encapsulation, control structures, file i/o, user defined
classes and object-oriented principles.

END

Introduction To Programming Using Robots

CS 04110:

This course teaches fundamental programming skills centered in the context of robot programming. Students will program
small robots to perform a variety of tasks. In addition to learning a sophisticated programming language, students will gain
skills in design techniques and experience working in teams to build complex systems.

END

Introduction To Object Oriented Programming

CS 04113:

Prerequisites: MATH 01122 or MATH 01130

This course introduces the fundamental concepts of programming from an object-oriented perspective. Topics are drawn
from classes and objects, abstraction, encapsulation, data types, calling methods and passing parameters decisions, loops,
arrays and collections, documentation, testing and debugging, exceptions, design issues, inheritance and polymorphic
variables and methods. The course emphasizes modern software engineering and design. Students are expected to be
sufficiently proficient in mathematics such that they are ready to take Calculus I (MATH 01130).

END

Object Oriented Programming And Data Abstraction

CS 04114:

Prerequisites: CS 04113 or (CS 04103 and CS 04112)

Objects and data abstraction continues from Introduction to Object-Oriented Programming to the methodology of
programming from an object-oriented perspective. Through the study of object design, this course introduces software
engineering and focuses on file I/O, function prototypes, exception handling, decoupling strategies, and other advanced
topics.

END

Creating Android Applications

CS 04171:

Prerequisites: None

This course is designed for students who want to start developing mobile applications on Android platforms and
understand the basic concepts of Computer Science. The course will start with the basics of Android programming by
covering the most recent version of Android and understanding its development framework. Students will then learn to
develop feature-rich Android applications using the MIT App Inventor Integrated Development Environment and learn
the basic "Big Ideas" of Computer Science such as, algorithmic thinking, abstractions, logic, flow control, and data
representation, storage and manipulation.

END

Advanced Programming Workshop

CS 04210:

Prerequisites: CS 04103 OR CS 04113 Minimum Grade of C-

Programming languages, integrated development environments, application programming interfaces, software packages,
and libraries are examples of programming technologies. This project intensive course, which is part of B.A. in Computing
and Informatics program, explores a specified programming technology at an advanced level.

END

Data Structures And Algorithms

CS 04222:

Prerequisites: CS 04.114 (C- or better) and MATH 03.160 or MATH 03.150; Corequisites: CS 01205

This course features programs of realistic complexity. The programs utilize data structures (string, lists, graphs, stacks,
trees) and algorithms (searching, sorting, etc.) for manipulating these data structures. The course emphasizes interactive
design and includes the use of microcomputer systems and direct access data files.

END

Principles of Data Structures

CS 04225:

Prerequisites: CS 04103 or CS 04113 Minimum Grade of C-

The course features programs of realistic complexity. The programs utilize data structures (strings, lists, graphs, stacks) and
algorithms (searching, sorting, etc.) for manipulating these data structures. The course emphasizes interactive design and
includes the use of microcomputer systems and direct access data files.

END

Bioinformatics - Computational Aspects

CS 04301:

Prerequisites: (CS 01104 or CS 04103) and CS 01205 and BINF 07250

This course introduces the student to the computer hardware, software, algorithms and statistical packages that are used in
computational aspects of bioinformatics. Hardware topics include multiprocessor clusters, high performance computing,
and parallelism. Software topics include message passing and shared memory styles of parallel/concurrent programming
languages, databases, available software packages, and visualization techniques for large data sets. Algorithms and statistical
packages include those for the study of molecular biology, evolution, structural biology, and biological networks.

END

Web Programming

CS 04305:

Prerequisites: CS 01205 and CS 04222

This course introduces the student to some of the underlying software components of the World Wide Web as it
currently exists. Topics include markup languages, scripting languages, programming languages such as Java, and other
software components of the Web.

END

Programming Languages

CS 04315:

Prerequisites: (CS 04222 or CS 04225 ) and ( CS 06205 or ECE 09241)

A study of the fundamental principles underlying the design of programming languages. Students will study two or more
languages from contrasting programming paradigms such as Functional, Object-Oriented, Logical, or Concurrent.

END

Blockchain Programming

CS 04350:

Prerequisites: (CS 10250 OR CS 07350) AND (CS 01104 OR cs 04113)

This course covers the computer science techniques to architect a collection of data into a blockchain data model.
Students will configure how each block stores data, learn how blocks are validated in order to add new ones to the chain; and
create methods to validate the chain integrity. Students will also create a back-end API web service and migrate their private
blockchain to the web service they created, learn how to post blocks to the blockchain via a web client and learn how to
validate blockchain health.

END

Advanced Android Programming

CS 04372:

Prerequisites: CS 10271 or CS 04225 or CS 04222

This course is designed to extend the material presented in Introduction to Android Programming (CS 04.371). This course
covers advanced and custom Android user interface development, localization and resource management, the Android
network API, location aware applications, data storage, testing and performance tuning, and publishing and selling Android
applications. Students will gain a deeper understanding of Android application development and have an exciting
opportunity to write feature-rich Android applications.

END

Advanced iOS Application Programming

CS 04376:

Prerequisites: CS 04375or permission of the instructor.

This course is designed to extend the material presented in Introduction to iOS Programming (CS 04.375). This course
covers advanced and custom iOS user interface development, localization, and resource management, the iOS network API,
location aware applications, data storage, testing, and performance tuning, and publishing and selling iOS applications.
Students will gain a deeper understanding of iOS application development and have an exciting opportunity to write
feature-rich iOS applications.

END

Object Oriented Design

CS 04380:

Prerequisites: CS 04222

This course will introduce important concepts, such as inheritance and polymorphism, which are crucial tools needed for
crafting object-oriented solutions to real-world problems. Design patterns that commonly occur in design situations will be
covered. A formal notation for describing and evaluating object-oriented designs such as the Unified Modeling Language
(UML) will be taught. Students will apply the concepts to design and implement object-oriented solutions to one or more
reasonably sized real-world problems.

END

Operating Systems

CS 04390:

Prerequisites: CS 04222 and CS 06205

The course concentrates on the design and functions of the operating systems of multi-user computers. Its topics include
time sharing methods of memory allocation and protection, files, CPU scheduling, input-output management, interrupt
handling, deadlocking and recovery and design principles. The course discusses one or more operating systems for small
computers, such as UNIX.

END

Parallel and Concurrent Programming

CS 04391:

Prerequisites: CS 04390 (can be taken concurrently)

Concurrency and parallelism are both used with respect to multithreaded programming. This course will cover techniques
on improving performance and/or responsiveness based on topics in parallel programming and concurrent programming.
Such topics may include optimizing the underlying parallel resources of a particular machine (such as multiple cores),
machine clustering, synchronization mechanisms (such as locking), responses to simultaneous occurring events, processes
and multithreading, context switching, race conditions or shared-memory multiprocessors.

END

System Programming And Operating System Internals

CS 04392:

Prerequisites: CS 04390 and CS 01205

This course examines the system kernel of a modern operating system including the file structure and implementation, the
process structure and process scheduling, memory management policies, and the I/O subsystem. This course also covers the
system call interface to the system kernel and various inter-process communication schemes.

END

CS 04394:

Distributed Systems

Prerequisites: (CS 06205 and CS 04222) or (ECE 09242 and CS 04225)

This course will introduce students to the Distributed System, a network of (possibly autonomous) computers that
cooperatively solve single problems or facilitate parallel execution of related tasks. Key topics of study include Distributed
Systems Architecture, Distributed Resource Management, and Accessing Distributed Resources. Students will participate
in algorithm, process and system design for distributed systems.

END

Computer Science - Senior Project

CS 04400:

Prerequisites: CS 01205 and CS 07340 and CS 07321

This is an advanced programming course in which students work on large-scale individual or team programming projects
and make a formal presentation on their work. The course discusses program development, methodologies and strategies.

END

Compiler Design

CS 04401:

Prerequisites: CS 04315 and CS 07210

This course presents theory of compiler design, syntax-directed translation, and code generation. Students design a
compiler for a subset of a high-level programming language.

END

Database Systems: Theory And Programming

CS 04430:

Prerequisites: CS 04222

This course focuses on the design of DBMS and their use to create databases. The course covers both the theoretical
concepts and the implementation aspects of database systems with a special emphasis on relational database systems, SQL,
programming (in a modern programming language such as C++ or Java) using a real database Application Programming
Interface (such as JDBC or ODBC)

END

Data Warehousing

CS 04440:

Prerequisites: MIS 02337 OR CS 10337 OR CS 04430

This course teaches Data Warehousing and its applications to Data Analytics and Knowledge Discovery. Topics include
requirements gathering for data warehousing, data warehouse architecture, dimensional model design for data warehousing,
physical database design for data warehousing, extracting, transforming, and loading strategies, introduction to Knowledge
Discovery, design and development of analytics applications, expansion and support of a data warehouse.

END

Topics in Mobile Programming

CS 04471:

Prerequisites: Permission of the instructor or sufficient programming background

Students will explore topics in mobile application development. This course covers the various mobile operating systems,
mobile development tools, and all that is needed to create mobile applications, using programming languages appropriate for
the mobile platform being studied. Students will gain an advanced understanding of mobile application development and
have an exciting opportunity to write and publish feature-rich mobile applications.

END

Advanced Software Engineering

CS 04623:

Prerequisites: CS 04524 Agile Software Engineering plus Matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR the COG in Software
Engineering program OR permission of the program coordinator

Students will apply their knowledge from Agile Software Engineering to explore in greater depth advanced theory and
practice of software engineering techniques. Emphasis will be placed on new and emerging methodologies like SAFE, Lean,
Kanban. Students will be expected to compare and contrast various methodologies and techniques and complete in-depth
assignments involving conference or journal papers from the software engineering literature.

END

Computer Organization

CS 06205:

Prerequisites: Minimum Requirement C- for each of the following: (CS 04113 or CS 04103) and (MATH 03160 or MATH 03150) and
Sophmore Standing

This course provides an introduction to computer organization. Students are exposed to the register level architecture of a
modern computer and its assembly language. The topics include machine level data representation, von Neumann
architecture and instruction execution cycle, memory hierarchy, I/O and interrupts, instruction sets and types, addressing
modes, instruction formats and translation.

END

Principles Of Digital Computers

CS 06310:

Prerequisites: CS 06205

This course provides an introduction to the fundamentals of computer hardware systems. The topics include digital logic,
combinational circuits, sequential circuits, memory system structure, bus and interconnection structure, computer
arithmetic and the ALU unit, I/O system structure, hardwired control unit, microprogrammed control unit, and alternative
computer architectures. This course is not open to students who have taken CS06.370 Digital Design and Lab.

END

Digital Computer Laboratory

CS 06311:

Corequisites: CS 06310 Prerequisites: CS 06205

This lab course provides the student with hands-on experience in the design and implementation of digital components.
State-of-the-art systems are used to design, test, and implement digital circuits: Combinational circuits, sequential circuits,
registers, counters, datapath, arithmetic/logic units, control units, and CPU design. This course is taken concurrently with
Principles of Digital Computers.

END

Introduction To Systems Simulation And Modeling

CS 06390:

Prerequisites: (CS 04222 or CS 04225) and (MATH 01210 or (ENGR 01202 and MATH01235))

The students in this course will understand the fundamentals of and have practical experience with system modeling and
simulation. Course topics include the Monte Carlo simulation technique, discrete event simulation algorithms and tools,
and principles of mathematical modeling, queuing theory, input modeling, output analysis, and verification and validation of
a simulation model. The students in this course will learn to use a commercial simulation software tool and will conduct a
simulation study in an engineering field.

END

Data Communications And Networking

CS 06410:

Prerequisites: CS 04222

Students in this upper-division course will study the principles of data communications and important network
architectures and protocols. Its topics include: the advantages of networking, major network architectures, protocol
reference models and stacks, the Data Link Layer, the Network Layer, the Transport Layer, and the Internet. Additional
topics may include: local, metropolitan and wide area networks; wireless, telephone and cellular networks; network security;
and network programming. Students complete a networking team project.

END

Advanced Computer Architecture

CS 06412:

Prerequisites: CS 06310

This is an advanced course in computer architecture designed to expand the knowledge gained by students in the
Principles of Digital Computers course. The topics include various performance enhancement techniques such as DMA,
I/O processor, cache memory, multiport memories, RISC, pipelining, and various advanced architectures such as high-level
language architecture, data-flow architecture, and multiprocessor and multi-computer architectures. This course also allows
detailed examination of one or two contemporary computers.

END

Wireless Networks, Protocols And Applications

CS 06415:

Prerequisites: CS 06410

This course prepares students to understand wireless networks systems, and the underlying communications technologies
that make them possible. The course covers descriptive material on wireless communications technologies, and important
deployed and proposed wireless networks and systems. Wireless system performance and Quality of Service capabilities are
addressed. Students will prepare and deliver technical presentations on state-of-the-art topics in wireless networks and
systems.

END

Tcp/Ip And Internet Protocols And Technologies

CS 06416:

Prerequisites: CS 06410

This is an advanced computer networking course that will expand students knowledge received in the Data
Communications and Networking course. This course will examine operation of the TCP/IP protocol as well as design and
architecture of the Internet. This course will cover such topics as: Medium access protocols, address resolution protocols,
Internet Protocol (IP), Quality of Service, Transport Protocol, and congestion control mechanisms. This course will also
include selected topics on network security and network management. Students will prepare and deliver technical
presentations on state-of-the-art research topics in the Internet.

END

Principles of Network Security

CS 06417:

Prerequisites: CS 01210 or CS 06410 and CS 07351

This course examines the fundamentals of network security. The material covered in this course includes such topics as
cryptographic systems necessary for network security, public key infrastructure, principles of data integrity, authentication,
and key management, Internet architecture and TCP/ICP protocol suite, application layer security, secure sockets layer and
transport layer security protocols, IPSec, distributed and cloud security, wireless and mobile security, network security
techniques and components, network-based vulnerability detection and penetration testing, defense in depth, and others.
Students will prepare and deliver technical presentations on state-of-the-art research topics in the network security.

END

Embedded Systems Programming

CS 06420:

Prerequisites: (CS 04390 and CS 06310 and CS 06311) or (CS 04390 and ECE 09241 and ECE 09242)

Embedded software is used in almost every electronic device. This course deals with software issues that arise in embedded
systems programming. Important concepts covered in this course will include device programming interfaces, device
drivers, multi-tasking with real-time constraints, task synchronization, device testing and debugging, and embedded
software development tools such as emulators and in-circuit debuggers. These concepts will be applied to design and
implement embedded software for one or more modest-sized embedded systems.

END

Cloud Computing and the Internet Things

CS 06440:

Prerequisites: (CS 01210 or CS 06410) and (CS 04225 or CS 04222)

This course exposes students to the variety, complexity, and capabilities of modern cloud platforms and investigates
Embedded Systems and the Internet of Things (IoT) techniques, and architectures. The topics covered in the course
include cloud infrastructure components,essential characteristics of cloud platforms, security implication of cloud
resources, typical instruction sets and architectures of embedded systems, IoT system architectures, IoT networking and
security, MQTT and REST protocols, cyber considerations and issues related to embedded systems and IoT devices,
hands-on experience in using Amazon and Microsoft cloud(AWS and Azure) to visualize live data streams of IoT devices as
well as other topics. Coursework will include student presentations and a term project that will provide exposure to
scientific research in cloud computing and IoT.

END

Introduction to IoT Upper Stack

CS 06447:

Prerequisites: CS 06440 OR ECE 09475

The Internet of Things is often characterized by a lower stack which involves connected device hardware and software and
an upper stack which contains the cloud platform and applications. A communications layer connects the upper and lower
stack. This course will explore the upper stack in depth, covering such topics as IoT security, cryptography, game theory
foundations, credential management for connected devices, data wrangling/cleansing and overviews of machine learning and
visualization.

END

Cyber Operations

CS 06470:

Prerequisites: CS 06417 and CS 01205

This course exposes students to the principals and practice of the cyber operations and will introduce a high-level overview
of the different phases of cyber operations and required critical skills. The topics covered in the course include offensive
cyber operations, software reverse engineering, detecting software vulnerabilities, identifying command and control
operations, implementing exploits for discovered vulnerabilities as well as other topics through hands-on experiences and
technical presentations.

END

Foundations Of Computer Science

CS 07210:

Prerequisites: C- or better in (MATH 03160 or MATH 03150) and one of the following: CS 01102, CS 04103, CS 01104 or CS 04113

This course provides an introduction to the theoretical foundations of computer science, including finite automata,
context-free grammars, Turing machines, and formal logic.

END

Robotics

CS 07310:

Prerequisites: (CS 04222 and MATH 01210) or (CS 04225 and ENGR 01202 and MATH 01236)

This course provides an introduction to the fundamentals of robotics. Students will study robot manipulators and mobile
robots, robot sensors, and robot cognition. Students will also gain experience programming in small groups, and
programming in a domain where noisy and imprecise data is commonplace.

END

Software Engineering Laboratory

CS 07320:

This lab is designed for students who are not taking CS 07321 Software Engineering I yet wish to learn how to use software
development tools. The course will cover selected topics in software engineering models and methods as well as software
design notations. Any pre-req software engineering knowledge will not be expected of students and will be included in
this course.

END

Software Engineering I

CS 07321:

Prerequisites: (CS04.222 or CS 04.225) and (CMS 04.205 or ENGR 01.202) and (WA 01.302 or ENGR 01.201)

An introduction to the discipline of Software Engineering. Students will explore the major phases of the Software
Lifecycle, including analysis, specification, design, implementation, and testing. Techniques for creating documentation and
using software development tools will be presented. Students will gain experience in these areas by working in teams to
develop a software system. Proficiency in programming is expected of the students entering this course.

END

Software Engineering II

CS 07322:

Prerequisites: CS 07321

Students will apply their knowledge from Software Engineering to develop an advanced software system, working in teams,
The project will be taken through each of the major software development phrases and student teams will create appropriate
deliverables for each phase. Advanced modern software engineering topics such as critical systems, real-time systems, formal
specification and validation, and project management will be covered.

END

Design And Analysis Of Algorithms

CS 07340:

Prerequisites: CS 04222 and CS 07210

In this course, students will learn to design and analyze efficient algorithms for sorting, searching, graphs, sets, matrices,
and other applications. Students will also learn to recognize and prove NP-Completeness.

END

Computer Cryptography

CS 07350:

Prerequisites: CS 07210 and CS 04222

This course introduces students to the principles and practices which are required for secure communication:
cryptography, cryptanalysis, authentication, integrity, and digital certificates. Mathematical tools and algorithms are used to
build and analyze secure cryptographic systems with computers. Social, political, and ethical aspects of cryptography are also
covered.

END

Cyber Security: Fundamentals, Principles and Applications

CS 07351:

Prerequisites: (MATH 03150 or MATH 03160) and CS 06205

This course exposes students to the security fundamental principles and will introduce a wide range of security activities,
methodologies, and procedures. The topics covered in the course include fundamental concepts of computer security,
principles of cryptography, software security and trusted systems, isolation and virtualization, host-based vulnerability
detection, security architecture, Windows and Linux system administration, access control and least privilege, legal and
ethics as well as other topics.

END

Security of Mobile Devices

CS 07353:

Prerequisites: CS 04222, CS 06205

This course focuses on the technical and logistical principles of securing mobile devices. Current operating systems,
applications and networks will be addressed. Social and ethical implications will also be explored throughout the course.
Both hands-on experience and scenario-based analysis will be emphasized in the course.

END

Cybersecurity Management, Policy and Risk

CS 07355:

This course covers cybersecurity planning and management, security risk analysis, policy, legal, ethics and compliance
issues and security program management from a technical cybersecurity perspective at the undergraduate level. Course is
cross-listed with MIS 02318 - Information Systems Risk Management. Students cannot receive credit for both.

END

Introduction To Computer Graphics

CS 07360:

Prerequisites: (MATH 01210 or MATH 01235) and CS 07340

This junior/senior level course covers such topics as fundamentals of graphics devices; use of graphics language/packages;
windowing and clipping; geometrical transformation in 2- and 3-D; raster display algorithms; hidden line and surface
elimination; animation.

END

Introduction To Information Visualization

CS 07370:

Prerequisites: CS 04.222 OR CS 04.225 OR MIS 02.337 OR MIS 02.338 OR CS 10.337

This is a junior/senior level course that introduces basic elements of Information Visualization, which is concerned with
the creation of visual representation of Big Data abstract phenomena for which there may not be a natural physical reality,
such as stock market movements, social relationships, gene expression levels, manufacturing production monitoring, survey
data from political polls, or supermarket purchases. Students will be exposed to techniques covering the five main phases of
developing information visualization tools: representation, presentation, interaction, perception and interpretation, and
evaluation. Students will be required to develop a large project related to information visualization.

END

Introduction To Computer Animation

CS 07380:

Prerequisites: (MATH 01210 or MATH 01236) and (PHYS02200 or PHYS 00220)

This is a junior/senior level course that takes a look at Computer Animation from a programmers perspective. It will
investigate the theory, algorithms, and techniques for describing and programming motion for virtual 3D worlds.
Approaches that will be explored include keyframing systems, kinematics, motion of articulated figures, and procedural and
behavioral systems. This course includes the implementation of techniques presented in lecture. Students are encouraged to
devise new techniques, implement them, and determine their effectiveness. Students will be required to implement and
document a large software project related to computer animation.

END

Introduction To Computer Game Design And Development

CS 07390:

Prerequisites: (CS 04222 or CS 04225) and(Math 01210 or MATH 01235)

This is a junior/senior level course that introduces the technology, science, and art involved in the creation of computer
games. Games will be examined in a systems context to understand gaming and game design fundamentals. The theory and
practice of developing computer games will be investigated from a blend of technical, aesthetic, and cultural perspectives.
Extensive study of past and current computer games will be used to illustrate course concepts. Group game development
and implementation projects will culminate in classroom presentation and evaluation.

END

Theory Of Computing

CS 07422:

Prerequisites: CS 04222 and MATH 01131 and CS 07210

This is an advanced course in the theoretical foundations of computer science, building on the introduction provided in
the Foundations of Computer Science course. It studies models of computers, such as finite automata and Turing machines,
formal languages, and computability, as well as the fundamentals of complexity theory and NP-completeness.

END

Human-Computer Interaction

CS 07430:

Prerequisites: CS 04222 or CS 04225

This course teaches the fundamental concepts of Human Computer Interaction (HCI) and user-centered design. Students
will learn how to create effective interfaces to both software and hardware systems that are both effecdtive and usable.
Students will study modeling, user testing, user interaction analysis techniques, and prototyping. Team projects are required.

END

Artificial Intelligence (Ai)

CS 07450:

Prerequisites: CS 04222 or CS 07210 and CS 01205 and MATH 01131

AI studies methods for programming "intelligent" behavior in computers. Students study the data representation methods
and algorithms used in AI, and survey research areas such as puzzle solving, game-playing, natural language processing,
expert systems, and learning. This is a mathematically and programming intensive course. In addition to readings,
discussion, and problem solving in AI, students will be expected to do significant programming tasks in languages that may
be new to them.

END

Machine Learning

CS 07455:

Prerequisites: MATH 01210 or MATH 01235 and STAT 02290 or ECE 09363

The use of computational approaches to extract information from vast amounts of data and make intelligent decision
based on that information constitutes the foundation of machine learning, a field that has made a dramatic impact on our
daily lives. From weather prediction to medical diagnosis, end-user recommendations to smart homes, autonomous vehicles
to speech identification, machine learning is now everywhere. This course introduces concepts, issues, and algorithms in
machine learning and pattern recognition, and will discuss both theoretical and practical aspects. Main topics of the course
will include basic learning theory, convex and evolutionary optimization techniques, supervised, unsupervised and
semi-supervised learning, ensemble systems, model selection and combination, feature selection and performance evaluation
techniques. The class will feature assignments and projects that allow students to implement various traditional and
emerging machine learning algorithms, and evaluate them on real-world applications.

END

Models of Deep Learning

CS 07459:

Prerequisites: STAT 02290 and MATH 01210

This course provides an in-depth, hands-on introduction to deep learning/neural network programming. This course will
highlight many practical computational, algorithmic and data issues related to designing, training and deploying deep
learning models. Prior programming knowledge is expected.

END

Computer Vision

CS 07460:

Prerequisites: CS 04222, MATH 01210, and STAT 02290

This course examines the fundamental issues in computer vision and major approaches that address them. The topics
include image formation, image filtering and transforms, image features, mathematical morphology, segmentation, camera
calibration, stereopsis, dynamic vision, object recognition and computer architectures for vision.

END

Introduction to Data Mining

CS 07480:

Prerequisites: (CS 04222 and NEUR 01450) and (STAT 02260 orSTAT 00290 or STAT 02280 or STAT 02284)

This course teaches the fundamental concepts of Data Mining. Students will learn how to program systems to gather and
analyze large data sets to discover important patterns.

END

Web and Text Mining

CS 07485:

Prerequisites: CS 04225 or CS 04222

This course teaches methods of mining large amounts of text. Students will be introduced to methods for obtaining,
exploring, and preprocessing large amounts of text. Tools for natural language processing, topic modeling, sentiment
analysis and Bayesian classifiers will be introduced. Business and biomedical applications of text mining will be discussed.

END

Advanced Software Engineering

CS 07523:

Prerequisites: Acceptance into the Computer ScienceMS or BS/MS program

Students will apply their knowledge from Software Engineering to develop an advanced software system, working in teams.
The project will be taken through each of the major software development phases, and student teams will create appropriate
deliverables for each phase. Advanced modern software engineering topics such as critical systems, real-time systems, formal
specification and validation, and project management will be covered. Students will be required to complete in-depth
assignments involving conference or journal papers from the software engineering literature.

END

Advanced Design And Analysis Of Algorithms

CS 07540:

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR the MS Data Science program OR permission of the program
coordinator

Students in this course will study efficient algorithms for sorting, searching, graphs, sets, matrices, and other applications,
and will learn to design and analyze new algorithms. Students will also learn to recognize and prove NP-Completeness.

END

Machine Learning I

CS 07556:

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This course introduces students to machine learning tasks at the graduate level including classification, regression, learning
with unlabeled data), common machine learning approaches, and mathematics required to understand advanced topics in
machine learning. Students will be exposed to topics such as data Issues in machine learning, Information-based learning
(Decision Tree), Similarity-based learning (k-nearest neighbor), Probabilistic-based learning (naïve Bayes, Maximum A
Posteriori, Bayesian Network), Linear Models (Perceptron, Linear Regression, Logistic Regression), Support Vector
Machine, Neural Network, Performance measure and evaluation, Descriptive Statistics and Result Visualization, Learning
with unlabeled data (clustering), Mathematics for Advanced Topics in Machine Learning (Topics in Probability, Linear
Algebra, and Optimization).

END

Information Visualization

CS 07570:

This is a graduate level course in Information Visualization. Topics covered include graphics programming, information
visualization general principles, visualization techniques for 1-dimensional, 2-dimensional, and N-dimensional information,
graph visualization, visualization techniques for image and digital libraries, as well as for the World Wide Web, interactivity,
theories behind information visualization, and focus+context techniques. This course also includes the implementation of
techniques presented in lecture. Students are encouraged to devise new techniques, implement them, and determine their
effectiveness. Students will be required to complete in-depth assignments, read, summarize, and present recent journal
papers from the information visualization literature, and prepare term papers with regard to an information visualization
research topic. Students will also be required to specify, design, implement, and document a semester-long software project
related to information visualization.

END

Natural Language Processing

CS 07655:

Prerequisites: CS 07540 Advanced Design and Analysis of Algorithms plus matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR
permission of the program coordinator

This course presents methods for allowing computers to understand and generate sentences in human languages (such as
English) and prepares the student to do research in natural language processing. Topics include syntax, semantics,
pragmatics, and knowledge representation.

END

Fundamentals of Network Security

CS 10200:

Prerequisites: CS 01210

This course introduces network security focusing on the overall processes with an emphasis on hands-on skills in the
following areas: security policy design and management; security technologies, products and solutions; firewall and secure
router design, installation, configuration, and maintenance; AAA implementation, and VPN implementation using routers.

END

Cryptography and Blockchain Essentials

CS 10250:

This introduction to the basic theory and practice of cryptographic techniques used in computer security will explore the
inner workings of cryptographic techniques and how to use them correctly. It will include consensus algorithms (such as
Proof of Work and Byzantine Consensus) and their role in blockchains and cryptocurrencies, cryptographic tools employed
in cryptocurrencies (including digital signatures algorithm and zeroknowledge proofs) and trusted hardware in
blockchain-based systems.

END

Introduction to Android Programming

CS 10271:

Prerequisites: CS 04113 or CS 04171 or CS 04103 or CS 01104 or CS 01102

This course is targeted for students who want to start writing mobile applications on Android platforms. Android has
become a formidable mobile operating system, and this course will provide hands-on learning on writing Android
applications. The course will start with the basics of Android programming by covering the most recent version of Android
and understanding its development framework. Students will then learn both the fundamentals and the nuts and bolts of
Android application development and have an exciting opportunity to write feature-rich Android applications. Students also
need a solid foundation in the Java Programming Language, and in particular, should be comfortable with writing functions, arrays, and class objects.

END

CS 10275:

Introduction to iOS Application Programming

Prerequisites: CS 04113 or CS 04171 or CS 04103 or CS 01104 or CS 01102

This course is targeted for students who wanted to start writing mobile applications on iOS platforms. iOS has become a
formidable mobile operating system, and the courses will provide hands-on learning on writing iOS applications. The course
will start with the basics of iOS programming by covering the most recent version of iOS and understanding its development
framework. Students will then learn both the fundamentals and the nuts and bolts of iOS application development and have
an exciting opportunity to write feature-rich iOS applications.

END

Introduction to Web Development

CS 10310:

Prerequisites: (MIS 02337 or CS 10377) or ( CS 10338 and CS 10339) or CS 04430 and (CS 04114 or CS 04210) and (CS 04222 or CS
04225)

This course, which is part of the BA in Computing and Informatics, teaches students the basic techniques of web site
development, including some of the tools, languages, and platforms that are commonly used for web sites. This course does
not count as a restricted elective for the BS in Computer Science.

END

Applied Database Technologies Applied Database Technologies

CS 10337:

Prerequisites: Must be enrolled in the BA in Computing & Informatics Major or the CUGS in MIS; May not be enrolled as the
following classifications: Freshman or Sophomore

This course covers the practical aspects of relational database systems, including database modeling using ER and EER
diagrams, physical database design, the relational database query language SQL, normal forms, database integrity and
transaction management. Includes a project involving an RDBMS.

END

SQL In-depth

CS 10338:

This course provides comprehensive coverage of the relational database query language SQL. The course covers core SQL
commands to define, manipulate, aggregate, and join data. Students will write advanced SQL queries (e.g., aggregate queries
and subqueries), learn both Data Manipulation Language (DML) and Data Definition Language (DDL), and create database
constraints.

END

Database Modeling and Design

CS 10339:

Prerequisites: CS 10338

This course covers the practical aspects of relational database systems, including database modeling using ER and EER
diagrams, physical database design, normal forms, database integrity and transaction management. It assumes a strong
working knowledge of SQL including Data Manipulation Language (DML) and Data Definition Language (DDL).

END

Systems Administration

CS 10340:

Prerequisites: CS 01211 AND CS 01210 OR persmission of theinstructor.

This course is designed to introduce students to the universal principles of systems administration that apply to all
platforms and the major operating system families: Linus/Unix and Windows. The students will have hands on experience
with the installation, configuration, administration, and management of core servers and core server operating systems.

END

Web Server Platforms

CS 10342:

Prerequisites: CS 10.310 OR permission of the instructor.

This course is designed to prepare students to install, configure, and maintain Web Servers. Students will learn about the
installation, access control, security, performance, managing, and troubleshooting of web server hardware, software, and
services.

END

Concepts of Computing Technologies

CS 10344:

Prerequisites: CS 01210or CS 06410; and CS 01211 or CS 07351

This course, which is part of the B.A. in Computing and Informatics program, examines the role, proper architecture, and
potential contributions of Information technologies and systems – what they are, how they should be configured, and how
they affect users of the technologies. This course covers a range of topics such as architectural planning, system and network
administration, identity and authentication systems, change and problem administration, configuration of computing
systems, data center and facilities management, capacity planning, document and content control, maintaining servers for
system availability and uptime, systems monitoring and performances tuning, as well disaster recovery and system
continuity.

END

Computing and Informatics Capstone Experience

CS 10430:

Prerequisites: CS 10310 AND CMS 04205

This course is designed to introduce students to all aspects of software production from the early stages of system
specification through to systems maintenance. This course provides an - exposure to the software development process by
which user needs are translated into a tangible software product.

END

Introductory Learning Assistant Experience in Computer Science

CS 99210:

Prerequisites: Permission of Supervising Instructor

The course is designed to provide students with an introductory experience in applied pedagogy associated with
collegiate-level Learning Assistant (LA) Models while deepening their mastery of computing fundamentals. Students will
review and prepare for practicum in a computing related course with exposure to LA skills and strategies. Students will
utilize learned LA skills and fundamental computing knowledge to facilitate in-class active and collaborative learning
exercises in small student groups. This course is recommended for all students interested in developing depth of their
computing knowledge with some specific pedagogical methods while also enhancing their communication and interpersonal
skills via student mentorship and staff collaboration.

END

Computer Field Experience

CS 99300:

Prerequisites: Permission of instructor and CS 04222 or CS 04225

In this course students are assigned projects in a professional environment.

END

Advanced Learning Assistant Seminar in Computer Science

CS 99310:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

This course is designed to provide students with more advanced experience in applied pedagogy associated with
collegiate-level Learning Assistant (LA) Models while further deepening their mastery of computing fundamentals. Students
will focus on the implementation of LA skills and strategies while completing their practicum in a computing related course.
Students will apply learned LA skills and computing knowledge in areas of assessment, design, development, and facilitation
of in-class active and collaborative learning activities and exercises. This course is recommended for all students interested
in continuing their development of some specific computing pedagogical methods, communication techniques, and
interpersonal skills via student mentorship and staff collaboration.

END

Computer Science Research I

CS 99390:

Prerequisites: permission of instructor and enrollment in the Computer Science or Computing and Informatics major.

This course will allow students to do real-world computer science research by applying what they've learned in the regular
computer science curriculum to complex research problems. Research will be guided by a faculty member of the Computer
Science department and requires the permission of an undergraduate Computer Science faculty member.

END

Computer Science Research II

CS 99490:

Prerequisites: CS 99390

This course will leverage the research skills and results from Computer Science Research I so students are capable of
performing high-level undergraduate computer science research to address complex research problems. Research will be
guided by a faculty member of the Computer Science department and requires the permission of an undergraduate
Computer Science faculty member.

END

Information Technology Foundations

CST 01110:

This course focuses on the essential IT skills and knowledge needed for tasks commonly performed by advanced end-users
and entry-level IT professionals alike. It focuses on the knowledge and skills required to identify and explain the basics of
computing, IT infrastructure, application and software, software development, database fundamentals, and security. This
course directly maps to CompTIA Information Technology Fundamentals Plus (ITF+) Certification.

END

Computer Hardware and Operations

CST 01111:

This course provides students with an in-depth knowledge of the internal operations of personal computers and the
software it relies on. It focuses on understanding the relationship between various computer parts and peripherals,
troubleshooting problems, customer service skills, and safety practices. This course directly maps to the CompTIA A+
Certification.

END

Implementations of SQL I Implementations of SQL I

CST 02110:

This course examines ANSI-standard SQL and its variations as implemented by the major relational database providers,
e.g., Oracle, Azure (Microsoft SQL Server), MySQL. It focuses on the SELECT clause including inner and outer joins,
aggregation, correlated and regular subqueries, modeling basics, and SQL functions across implementations.

END

Implementations of SQL II

CST 02210:

Prerequisites: CST 02110

This course builds on the fundamentals of SQL and introduces relational data manipulation and definition languages
(DML and DDL), the use of metadata such as dictionary and schema objects, indexes and query optimization.

END

Database Administration I

CST 02220:

Prerequisites: CST 02210

This course introduces the principles of database administration including the role of a DBA, database implementation
and configuration options, and tradeoffs between various database configurations.

END

Database Development

CST 02230:

Prerequisites: CST 02210

This course goes over key principles in database development including data modeling, normalization, and NoSQL
databases.

END

Database Security

CST 02250:

Prerequisites: CST 02220

This course is a comprehensive survey of database security techniques. It will describe several types of attack such as
inference attacks or injection attacks. It will also discuss key database countermeansures such as intrinisic database security,
roles, password management techniques, row-level security, encryption, securing connections, views as a security tool.
Finally it will expose students to security logs and audit trails.

END

Database Administration II

CST 02320:

Prerequisites: CST 02220

This advanced course in database administration will cover such topics as replication, data migration, transactions, as well
as backup and recovery techniques.

END

Database Programming

CST 02330:

Prerequisites: CST 02210

This course covers database programming techniques, whether at the database layer (e.g., triggers, functions and
procedures) or at the business tier layer in the form of transmissible data formats to webserver software or client services

END

Database Warehouse Principles

CST 02400:

Prerequisites: CST 02330

This course covers many of the principles of data warehousing, including batch data vs streaming data, data analytics core
concepts and analytics techniques, data visualization (e.g., visualization, reporting, business intelligence (BI)), b. basic chart
types such as bar charts and pie charts, and data processing such as ETL tools.

END

Security+

CST 03201:

This course examines various IT security topics such as cryptography and access control, as well as topics in the
business-related IT subfields of risk management and disaster recovery. It focuses on the following domains – threats,
attacks, and vulnerabilities; architecture and design; implementation, operation, and incident response; and governance,
risk, and compliance. This class directly maps to CompTIA Security Plus (Sec+) Certification.

END

Penetration Testing Fundamentals

CST 03215:

Prerequisites: CST 09210

The purpose of this course is to give students of all backgrounds and experience levels a well-researched and engaging
introduction to the realm of penetration testing. With real-world examples that reflect today’s most important and relevant
security topics, this course addresses how and why people attack computers and networks, so that students can be armed
with the knowledge and techniques to successfully combat hackers. Because the world of information security changes so
quickly and is often the subject of much hype, this course also aims to provide a clear differentiation between hacking myths
and hacking facts. Many hands-on exercises are included, which allow students to practice skills as they are learned.

END

Foundations of Computer Forensics

CST 03252:

This interdisciplinary course focuses on the legal and technical principles of digital forensics. Analysis of complex legal
issues and current trends in high technology crime will be followed by exploration of formal methodologies and best
practices for the forensically sound acquisition and analysis of digital evidence. Social and ethical impacts will also be
explored throughout the course as it relates to high technology crime. Hands-on scenario based activities will provide
students with opportunities to develop the legal understanding and technical skills that will serve as a foundation to pursue
careers in computer forensics in law enforcement and the private sector.

END

Applications for Computer Forensics

CST 03253:

Prerequisites: CST 03252

This course covers the active use of EnCase Forensic software. It focuses on Digital forensic and EnCase Forensic
concepts and methodology such as: the proper handling and acquisition of digital evidence using EnCase; basic computer
functionality as well as that of various computer file systems; examining various artifacts using EnCase Forensic, including
the Windows registry, Windows artifacts, email, and Internet history; and creating and exporting an examination report
using EnCase Forensic. This course directly maps to the EnCASE Certified Examiner Preparation (EnCE) Certification.

END

Introduction to Intrusion Detection

CST 03270:

This course introduces Splunk and how to use fields; get statistics from your data; and create reports, dashboards, lookups,
and alerts. Scenario-based examples and hands-on challenges will enable you to create robust searches, reports, and charts. It
also introduces Splunk's datasets features and Pivot interface. This course directly maps to Splunk Fundamentals 1 and 2
Certifications.

END

Advanced Penetration Testing

CST 03315:

Prerequisites: CST 03215

This course covers penetration testing tools and techniques via hands-on experience. This course trains not only the skills
but also the mindset required to be a successful penetration tester. The course focuses on proper planning, scoping, and
recon, and then dives deep into scanning, target exploitation, password attacks, and wireless and web apps with detailed
hands-on exercises. This course directly maps to the Offense Security Certified Professional (OSCP) Certification.

END

Digital Incident Handling

CST 03352:

This course is a method-driven program that uses a holistic approach to cover vast concepts concerning organizational
incident handling and response, from preparing and planning the incident handling response process to recovering
organizational assets after a security incident. The course focuses on all the stages involved in incident handling and the
response process. This course directly maps to the EC-Council Certified Incident Handler (ECIH) Certification.

END

IDS/IPS Administration

CST 03370:

This course is designed to introduce concepts for system administrators who are responsible for managing the Splunk
Enterprise environment. The course provides the fundamental knowledge of Splunk license manager, indexers, and search
heads. It covers the configuration, management, and monitoring of core Splunk Enterprise components. This course
directly maps to Splunk Enterprise System Administration Certification.

END

Knowledge Management in IDS/IPS

CST 03372:

Prerequisites: CST 03270

This course focuses on additional Splunk search commands as well as advanced use of knowledge objects. Major topics
include advanced statistics and eval commands, advanced lookup topics, advanced alert actions, using regex and erex to
extract fields, using spath to work with self-referencing data, creating nested macros and macros with event types, and
accelerating reports and data models. This course directly maps to Splunk Fundamentals 3 Certification.

END

Cyber Defense

CST 03410:

This course covers the most up-to-date core security analyst skills and upcoming job skills used by threat intelligence
analysts, application security analysts, etc. Not only does it focus on the knowledge and skills required to proactively
capture, monitor, and respond to network traffic findings, but it also emphasizes software and application security,
automation, threat hunting, and IT regulatory compliance, which affects the daily work of security analysts. This course
directly maps to the CompTIA Cyber Security Analyst Plus (CySA+) Certification.

END

Advanced Topics in Ethical Hacking

CST 03418:

Prerequisites: CST 03218

The course covers the methodologies and tools required to assess the security posture of an organization by identifying
vulnerabilities in the network and system infrastructure to determine if unauthorized access is possible. It focuses on the
most advanced tools and techniques used by black and grey hat hackers alike to break into an organization to assess,
document, and remediate vulnerabilities from a vendor-neutral perspective. This course directly maps to the EC-Council
Certified Ethical Hacker (CEH) certification.

END

Advanced Digital Forensics Investigation

CST 03452:

Prerequisites: CST 03252

This course provides a firm grasp of digital forensics, presenting a detailed and methodological approach to digital
forensics and evidence analysis that also pivots around Dark Web, IoT, and Cloud Forensics. The tools and techniques
covered in this course will prepare the learner for conducting digital investigations using groundbreaking digital forensics
technologies. This course directly maps to the EC-Council Certified Hacking Forensics Investigator (CHFI) Certification.

END

IDS/IPS for Cloud

CST 03472:

Prerequisites: CST 03270

This course prepares administrators to manage users and get data in Splunk Cloud. Topics include data inputs and
forwarder configuration, data management, user accounts, and basic monitoring and problem isolation. The focus of this
class is the knowledge, best practices, and configuration details for Splunk Cloud. This course directly maps to Splunk Cloud
Administration Certification.

END

Linux/Unix Essentials

CST 06220:

This course is designed to give students an introduction to Linux/Unix like Operating Systems. Since this course serves as
an introduction, no prior experience with Linux/Unix like Operating Systems is required. This course will show students
how to connect to a Linux/Unix like Operating System and engage with it via the command line. Students will learn about
the Linux/Unix hierarchical file structure, basic protection and permission features, and file editing operations from the
command line. Students will also learn how to use streams, pipes, and redirects with typical Linux/Unix like programs such
as awk, grep and sort. The experience is then capped by creating automated systems using a shell programming language
such as bash.

END

Linux/Unix Administration

CST 06225:

Prerequisites: CST 06220

This is an intermediate course that requires pre-existing work with a Linux/Unix like Operating System. This course
focuses on the administrator role of a system and the tools needed to perform common administration tasks. Students will
learn how to navigate a package manager, configure a boot manager, and monitor tasks. In depth use of regular expressions
will be taught so students can process logs and enforce appropriate resource usage. In depth discussion on the relationships
between users, groups and services will be addressed as well as the security principles that follow.

END

Microcomputer Operating Systems I: Workstation

CST 06230:

This course is designed to give students an introduction to the Windows environment as a client in the client-server
model. Topics include the installation of a Windows environment, network customization, securing file systems and setting
up local and network printing. Operating System hardening concepts are then addressed by way of the dispatch of
administrator and group accounts, customization via registry editing, and introducing peer-to-peer communication. No
experience with the Windows Workstation is needed prior to joining this course.

END

Microcomputer Operating Systems II: Server Systems

CST 06235:

Prerequisites: CST 06230

Students in this course will gain an in-depth experience working with Windows server systems in the client-server model.
Instruction begins with the installation and customization of a Windows Server Operating System. Focus is then given to
customization of the network environment by using user, group, and network resource management tools along with
environment and application group policies. Server protocols such as the Dynamic Host Control Protocol will be addressed
as well as implementing a Domain Name System. Students will then learn how to perform customization via remote access
and how to perform remote deployment.

END

Linux Systems and Services

CST 06240:

Prerequisites: CST 06220 and CST 09210

Linux System and Services is an in-depth course requiring pre-existing experience with the Linux Operating System.
Students will learn how to employ a system administrator role to manage user and group accounts to perform monitoring
actions. Students will also learn about localization, internationalization, and character encoding. Exercises related to system
time via timestamps, job scheduling with cron, and logging will also be used. Finally, students will be able to setup and
configure commonly used services on Linux systems such as print, email, and databases.

END

Introduction to Azure Cloud Services

CST 06340:

This is an introductory course to the Azure Cloud services system. Students need no prior experience with Azure systems
to enroll in this course. Students will gain an introduction to cloud computing concepts and terminology as well as how to
setup an account and manage it through the Azure website interface. Students will then be able to setup a small Azure
project using the Azure sandbox. Important alerts and monitors will also be set up so students can monitor billing usage.

END

Azure Management Tools and Security

CST 06343:

Prerequisites: CST 06340

This is an intermediate course using the Azure Cloud services system. Students will learn about the difference services that
the Azure system offers as well as the deployment mechanisms used for the services. Users will be able to setup monitoring
systems, gain exposure to the security mechanisms in place and configure event detection. Students may also gain exposure
to network principles used in cloud computing such as Firewalls and security groups.

END

Azure Services and Lifecycles

CST 06440:

Prerequisites: CST 06340

This course is an advanced course on using the Azure Cloud services system. Students will learn, from a business
perspective, about cloud governance and deployment strategies. Students will also learn about regulatory and compliance
standards as well as migration plans for already implemented systems. Students will partake in a project that involves cloud
management, documentation, security audits, and “cloud spend” reports to assess deployment solutions.

END

Introduction To Computer Networks And Data Communications

CST 09210:

This course examines the basics of data communication and computer networks and covers such topics as IT system
components, layered network architectures, introduction to internetworking, the Internet, IP protocols, basics of TCP and
UDP transmission protocols, standard network applications and basics of network security, network utility software,
network traffic analysis, network mapping techniques, and configuring local area networks in a popular operating system.

END

Intermediate Networking

CST 09290:

Prerequisites: CST 09210

This course will examine more advanced topics in data communication and computer networks and will cover such topics
such as wide area network, multi-media communication, security, wireless technology, network routing, and switching
configuration tools.

END

Network Support and Troubleshooting

CST 09310:

Prerequisites: CST 09210

This course focuses on the technical skills needed to securely establish, maintain and troubleshoot the essential networks
that businesses rely on. Areas of focus includes network architecture, performance monitoring, wireless technology and
network security.

END

Network Architectures, Models, and Protocols

CST 09320:

Prerequisites: CST 09290

The course focuses on introduction to Cisco network architectures, models, protocols, and networking elements that
connect users, devices, applications and data through the internet and across modern computer networks - including IP
addressing and Ethernet fundamentals. By the end of the course, students can build simple local area networks (LANs) that
integrate IP addressing schemes.

END

Network Communication and Configuration

CST 09325:

Prerequisites: CST 09320

The course focuses on Cisco network architectures, models, protocols, and networking elements that connect users,
devices, applications and data through the internet and across modern computer networks - including IP addressing and
Ethernet fundamentals. Students will build simple local area networks (LANs) that integrate foundational network security,
and perform basic configurations for routers and switches.

END

witching, Routing and Wireless Essentials

CST 09430:

Prerequisites: CST 09325

This course focuses on switching technologies and router operations that support small-to-medium business networks and
includes wireless local area networks (WLANs) and security concepts. Students learn key switching and routing concepts.
They can perform basic network configuration and troubleshooting, identify, and mitigate LAN security threats, and
configure and secure a basic WLAN. Students are required to have successfully completed the Introduction and
intermediate to Cisco Networks courses prior to beginning the Switching, Routing and Wireless Essentials (SRWE) course.

END

Enterprise Networking, Security, and Automation

CST 09435:

Prerequisites: CST 09430

This course focuses on the architectures and network considerations related to designing, securing, operating, and
troubleshooting enterprise networks. This course covers wide area network (WAN) technologies and quality of service
(QoS) mechanisms used for secure remote access. This course also introduces software-defined networking, virtualization,
and automation concepts that support the digitalization of networks. Students gain skills to configure and troubleshoot
enterprise networks, and learn to identify and protect against cybersecurity threats. They are introduced to network
management tools and learn key concepts of software-defined networking, including controller-based architectures and how
application programming interfaces (APIs) enable network automation

END

DA 01505:

Data Analytics Capstone Practicum

Prerequisites: Graduate standing or permission of the instructor.

This course provides a culminating experience for students graduating with an M.S. in Data Analytics. This course will
reinforce ethical awareness and good decision making in health-related situations and discuss the specific professional and
ethical responsibilities of the health data practitioner.

END

Patient Data Privacy & Ethics

DA 03511:

Prerequisites: Graduate standing or permission of the instructor.

In this course we
focus on understanding privacy and ethical issues as they relate to patient and other health-related data, as well as to health
information systems. Industry trends and developments will be researched and tracked by the students.

END

Introduction to Data Science

DS 01100:

This course provides an introduction to the foundational topics in data science including data manipulation, data analysis
with statistics, machine learning, data communication and information visualization. It is intended to introduce the tools
and techniques necessary to solve problems involving data. As an introductory course, it will utilize and explain
programming and statistical data analyses without requiring prerequisite coursework in these areas. It is designed for the
student interested in exploring the data science field, or as a first course in a degree program in data analytics or data science.

END

In-Depth Introduction to Data Science

DS 01101:

This course is a more in-depth version of DS 01.100 Introduction to Data Science. This course provides an introduction to
the foundational topics in data science including data manipulation, data analysis with statistics, machine learning, data
communication and information visualization. It is intended to introduce the tools and techniques necessary to solve
problems involving data. As an introductory course, it will utilize and explain programming and statistical data analyses
without requiring pre-req coursework in these areas. It is designed for the student interested in exploring the data
science field, or as a first course in a degree program in data analytics or data science. The course will include additional
modules such as ethics of data acquisition, data analysis and storage mechanisms, and advanced programming functions in
command-based languages such as Python and R, as well as more advanced statistical analysis tools.

END

DS 01390:

This course will allow students to do real-world multidiscipline research by applying what they've learned in the regular
data science curriculum to large data sets.

Data Science Research I

END

Data Science Research II

DS 01490:

Prerequisites: DS 01390

This course will allow students to do real-world multidiscipline research by applying what they've learned in the regular
data science curriculum to large data sets. This is a continuation course that will allow students to work on significant
projects or to continue research started in DS 01390 Data Science Research I.

END

DS 02395:

Prerequisites: Junior Status

This course enables the faculty to offer courses in topics in Data Science which are not offered on a regular basis.

Topics in Data Science

END

Visual Analytics

DS 02510:

Prerequisites: Graduate standing or permission of the instructor.

This is a graduate level course that investigates visual analytics tools and techniques used to synthesize information and
derive insight from massive, dynamic, ambiguous, and often conflicting data, and to communicate the findings effectively
for decision-making. Extensive use of case studies based on real-world events will be used to illustrate course concepts.
Students will be required to present recent conference or journal papers from the visual analytics literature and to apply
visual analytics techniques toward a focused research problem in a real-world application or a domain of interest.

END

INTR 01265:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

Computers and Society

END

Computers and Society - WI

INTR 01266:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This interdisciplinary course focuses upon the effects of computer systems on individuals and institutions. How computer
systems are developed and operated will be related to an analysis of current trends in American society. A study of present
and probably future applications of computers in such areas as management, economic planning, data collections, social
engineering, education and the military will be followed by an exploration of the relationship of computer systems to
problem solving orientations, bureaucratization, centralization of power, alienation, privacy, autonomy and peoples'
self-concept. This course is open to students at any level who satisfy the pre-req and have course work in computer
science or sociology or permission of instructor.

END

Socio-Economic Applications of Blockchain

ECON 04335:

This course explores blockchain technology and its use value within a socioeconomics framework. The course will examine
the platform's advantages in addressing socioeconomics issues faced by the public and private sectors such as risk, fraud and
administrative cost, need for increased transparency and accountability, accessibility, transcending borders and more
efficiency within the topic areas of economics, trade finance, healthcare, sustainable development, governance, corruption
and digital identity.

END

COUN 26450:

Mental Health Awareness and (Emotional) Crisis Management in Educational Settings

The purpose of this course is to provide future educators and professionals in P-12 and higher educational settings with an
overview of mental health, how behaviors may present in schools, an opportunity to learn individual and systemic
educational prevention and interventions, and to explore policies and ways to handle crisis management within the context
of emotional safety.

END

COUN 26451:

Trauma Informed Practices to Promote Social Emotional Development in
Educational Settings

The purpose of this course is to provide future educators, professionals, and administrators in P-12 and higher educational
settings with an overview of trauma- informed practices in educational settings, that support the social emotional
development of all students. Students will explore the core tenants of trauma informed practices, including social emotional
development, and how to address systemically through whole school initiatives, individual classrooms, and across content
areas. Students will also learn how to implement and evaluate these practices.

END

Neurodiverse Learning and Social Emotional Development in Educational Settings

COUN 26452:

The purpose of this course is to provide future educators, professionals, and administrators in P-12 and higher educational
settings with an overview of neurodiverse learners in educational settings and how to support their academic and social
emotional development.

END

Leadership Theory

EDSU 28100:

This course is an introduction into the academic study of leadership from a theoretical perspective that broadly examines
the historical, social, and political context of leadership as a concept and process.

END

Leading Among Diverse Perspectives

EDSU 28110:

This course focuses on understanding that leadership requires recognizing and valuing the differences that exist among
people as employees, colleagues, and team members. These differences result people bringing various perspectives and
approaches to professional environments. The course provides an understanding of the historical and current experiences of
groups in society and the contributions of those groups in organizations. Additionally, the course focuses on inclusive and
collaborative leadership approaches.

END

Grant Acquisition and Management

EDSU 28120:

The course will focus on searching for, identifying, and preparing proposals for grant funding. The course will elucidate
differences between federal and foundation grants. Students will explore the fundamental components of a grant proposal
such as the abstract or summary, background and significance, specific aims/goals and objectives, project design and
methods, sustainability, assessment, broader impacts, dissemination, budget, budget justification, and cover letter as well as
the overall grant submission process.

END

Designing and Evaluating Organizational Initiatives

EDSU 28130:

This course focuses on creating organizational initiatives and evaluating the effectiveness of those initiatives. Topics
include setting organizational goals; analyzing organizational activities; assessing strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and
threats (SWOT); understanding organizational change and resistance, evaluation approaches, administering and analyzing
organizational evaluations and creating recommendations based on evaluation outcomes.

END

Leadership Seminar I

EDSU 28205:

Prerequisites: EDSU 28100 & EDSU 28110 & EDSU 28120 & EDSU 28130

This seminar joins leadership theory and practice by requiring students to explore leadership issues in an active, hands-on
way through an internship of 120 hours (or a major project approved by the instructor). The course will provide students
with a more in-depth understanding of leadership as it relates to various settings, leadership ethics, leadership and
technology, writing persuasively in a leadership way, understanding organizational culture, and basic budgeting.

END

Educational Organizations

EDSU 28210:

Prerequisites: FNDS 21150, FNDS 21230

This course provides an opportunity for students to learn about the structure and administration of educational and
educationally-related organizations including various models of organizations and organizational cultures and how structures
and cultures can promote organizational growth.

END

Access, Success, and Equity in Education

EDSU 28211:

Prerequisites: FNDS 21150, FNDS 21230, EDSU 28210

This course provides an overview of inequity in educational opportunity and outcomes. The course covers elementary,
secondary and postsecondary contexts and the steps and processes that can improve educational opportunity and outcomes
to bring about a more equitable system.

END

Education and Empowerment for Social Change

EDSU 28212:

Prerequisites: FNDS 21150, FNDS 21230, EDSU 28210, EDSU 28211

Students learn how education can be used to empower individuals and communities and the steps necessary to begin;
including the ability to account for and set organizational goals; gather, understand, and interpret data on organizational
goals; motivate individual and organizational learning; and incorporate multiple perspectives.

END

Leadership Seminar II (Capstone)

EDSU 28305:

Prerequisites: EDSU 28205

This seminar provides students with a greater understanding of and appreciation for leadership through a required 120
hour internship (or major project with instructor approval). The course focuses on the development of skills needed to
manage change in organizations, such as understanding change as a process, conflict resolution, group dynamics, and team
building.

END

Methods And Materials In Health Teaching For School Nurses

SNUR 92430:

This course emphasizes the school nurse's expanding role as a classroom health teacher as well as a resource person to the
school staff. Discussions and experiences will center on theories of teaching and learning, planning for teaching, curriculum
development, the New Jersey Core Curriculum Content Standards (NJCCCS), teaching strategies, educational resources,
classroom management, assessment, and the integration of health teaching into varied school subjects. A K-12 classroom
experience is included to facilitate the integration of theory into the clinical practice.

END

Practicum In School Nursing

SNUR 92444:

Prerequisites: SNUR 92466

The purpose of this field experience is to provide an opportunity for the student to engage in a mentoring relationship with
an experienced, certified school nurse. The student will have the opportunity to observe and participate in the various roles,
functions, and activities of the school nurse. The course requires 50 hours of clinical experience with the school nurse
mentor. A University supervisor will visit the student in the field placement situation. Meetings of all students enrolled in
the Practicum are held periodically at the University's Glassboro campus.

END

Internship In Health Teaching For School Nursing

SNUR 92445:

Corequisites: SNUR 92448 Prerequisites: SNUR 92430 andSNUR 92466

The purpose of this field experience is to provide an opportunity for the student to utilize the NJ Comprehensive Health
Education and Physical Education Curriculum Framework and the NJ Core Curriculum Content Standards to teach health
classes in a classroom setting with an experienced, New Jersey certified teacher. The course incorporates the interaction
between the school nurse and the school counseling program, by utilizing school guidance counseling standards and
indicators. The course requires 10 hours of teacher observation prior to teaching 40 hours of health. A University supervisor
will visit the student in the employed or field placement situation. Meetings of all students enrolled in the Internship course
are held periodically at the University’s Glassboro Campus.

END

Health Teaching Methods For School Nursing Seminar

SNUR 92448:

Corequisites: SNUR 92445 Prerequisites: SNUR 92430 and SNUR 92466

This senior level seminar is to be taken with Internship in Health Teaching for School Nursing (SNUR92.445). The
seminar will focus on four major areas: issues in health education, instructional strategies and classroom management,
analysis and assessment of the Internship in Health Teaching for School Nursing experience, and preparation for school
nurse employment.

END

School Health Services

SNUR 92466:

School Health Services and functions of the school nurse within the organizing framework of the CDC's School Health
Model/Whole School, Whole Community, Whole Child are discussed, as well as specific roles to include that of the school
nurse within the comprehensive school counseling program. The interface between health services and nationally utilized
school guidance counseling standards and indicators is discussed. Fundamentals of substance abuse are included to provide a
basis of understanding with regard to the role of the school nurse including relevant information on best practices,
resources, and the referral process. Particular emphasis is placed on the role of code, regulation, and SHS policy, as well as
available resources relating to students, their families, and SHS personnel.

END

Signals, Systems and Music

ECE 09100:

This course is an introduction to the analysis and creative production of electronic music. The student will experience
music using the principles of music theory, electronic signal analysis and system development. Both lecture and laboratory
sessions are presented culminating in the development and production of electronic music using recorded sound, software
generated signals and electronically produced signals.

END

Electrical and Computer Engineering: Solving Tomorrow's Problems

ECE 09101:

Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) is the field of engineering that has a broad reach, many real-world applications
and a great impact on our lives, yet few know the impact of ECE in solving humanity’s problems. This course will introduce
students to the field of ECE and provide a broad overview of its subfields and its applications through a series of hands-on
project experiences based on current design trends. This course will also stimulate students’ interests in this field by
demonstrating the extensive reach of ECE in solving a very wide range of current and emerging problems that most people
do not even realize that are solved by advancements in ECE. Finally, this course will also provide a preview of the ECE
program of study, introducing some of the most critical concepts taught throughout the curriculum, including
instrumentation, microprocessor programming, embedded systems, circuit analysis, signal processing, and machine learning.
This course will be taught from a hands-on and project based approach, focused on integrating many of the topics covered in
the course.

END

ECE 09203:

Principles of Electric Circuit Analysis

Prerequisites: MATH 01131 and ECE 09101 and PHYS 00222 (Minimum Grade of C)

The fundamental principles of circuit and network theory constitute the very foundation on which the field of electrical
engineering stands. From a simple household item such as a toaster or flashlight, to the most advanced devices, large scale
electric power distribution and transmission systems, including such emerging topics as smart grid, photovoltaic energy
generation to electric vehicle technology, all operate based on the basic concepts of circuit and network theory. This core
course, which constitutes the primary prerequisite of most other ECE courses, is designed to provide the students not only
with a comprehensive foundation of circuit and network theory, but also the basic skills of circuit analysis, design and
testing. Starting with Ohm's Law, this course first discusses resistive and DC circuits and introduces Kirchhoff's Laws,
Thevenin and Norton equivalents of networks, mesh and nodal analysis, followed by independent and dependent sources,
and operational amplifiers. The second half of the course focuses on AC circuits and memristors. Laplace transforms will be
introduced for transient and steady state response of networks, followed by various applications of AC circuits, such as
filters. Computer-aided analysis and simulation tools are also presented as contemporary methods of network analysis and
design.

END

Clinical and Medical Technology in Today's Medicine

ECE 09204:

Prerequisites: MATH 01123

This is a general education laboratory science course intended to provide students with a survey of current and emerging
clinical and medical technologies. The course will first introduce signals of biological origin, discussing how they are
generated, how they can be measured and how they are processed; followed by an overview and operation principles of
clinical and medical devices that have been developed to measure and analyze various physiological systems. The course will
also include an overview of medical imaging technologies as well as other current and emerging technologies, such as DNA
sequencers and microarrays. Safety and ethical considerations in design and use of these technologies will also be discussed.
The course will have a laboratory component allowing students to interact with real-world biological signals, systems and
devices. Specifically, students will be able to acquire, analyze and interpret their own vital signals, such as signals of
cardiovascular, respiratory or neurological origin.

END

Principles and Applications of ECE for Nonmajors

ECE 09205:

Prerequisites: (CS 04103 Minimum Grade of D- or CS 04113 Minimum Grade of D- or CS 01104 Minimum Grade D-) and
PHYS00222 Minimum Grade of C and MATH 01230 Minimum Grade of D-

This course covers basic concepts of Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) topics for non-majors. An emphasis is
placed on practical applications using ECE hardware and analytical techniques to be able to design, analyze (or simulate),
build, and test practical circuits. The content includes basic cirect current (DC) and alternating current (AC) circuit
principles, circuit law and analysis methods, diodes, transistors, operational amplifiers, power supplies, analog filters and
electro-mechanics (DC motors).

END

Fundamentals of Digital Systems

ECE 09240:

Fundamentals of Digital Systems is the first course in digital electronics, providing the foundation necessary to understand,
analyze, design and build digital logic systems. The course will start by introducing the foundations of discrete math that is
the bedrock of all digital systems, including binary, octal and hexadecimal number systems, logical expressions and the
Boolean algebra to manipulate and minimize the logical expressions. The course will then introduce basic logic gates,
flip-flops as the fundamental logic circuit element, followed by analysis and design of combinatorial and sequential logic
circuits, analog to digital and digital to analog conversion, and finite state machines.

END

Introduction to Digital Systems

ECE 09241:

Prerequisites: ECE 09101 and (CS 04103 or CS 04113)

Digital Systems dominate the globe, from a simple stopwatch to a cellphone to the international space station, each of
these are dependent on Digital Systems. Digital systems, at the most elementary level, are composed of 0's and 1's and
rudimentary logic functions. This core course takes a hands-on approach, starting with how to physically build basic logic
functions (AND, OR, NOT) from transistors all the way to how to combine these functions to make complex digital
systems. during the course students will learn how numbers and information are stored and manipulated in a digital system
and how these basic principals can be expanded to create a computer processor. The focus of the course will be on
alternative number systems (Binary, Octal, Hexadecimal), Boolean algebra, minimization, combinational circuit design, and
sequential circuit design. Both synchronous and asynchronous network design and state machines will be covered. Students
will get hands-on experience using modern development tools to design, test, and implement digital systems.

END

ECE 09243:

Computer Architecture

Prerequisites: ECE 09241 and CS 04103 or CS 04113

Computers and systems are ubiquitous. Processors are encountered at every computational scale ranging from embedded
microprocessors in smart phones and speakers, through desktop, laptop, and tablet computers with extensive memory and
I/O, to supercomputers composed of arrays of processors. This core course provides a foundation for understanding
computer architecture and the interplay between the central processor, memory and input/output. The course will cover a
range of analysis and design techniques and include a survey of representative modern architectures. One will be selected to
provide the basis for further inquiry and to provide a platform for project-based learning.

END

Engineering Electromagnetics

ECE 09303:

Prerequisites: (ECE 09203 and MATH 01235) or (ECE 09203 and MATH 01210 and MATH 01231)

Engineering electromagnetics covers applications of electrostatics, magnetostatics, quasistatics, and electromagnetic wave
propogation in contemporary electrical engineering practice. The course also covers numerical modeling/analysis of
electromagnetic systems using appropriate software and laboratory-based measurements.

END

Electronics I

ECE 09311:

Prerequisites: ECE 09203 Minimum Grade of C

The first course in electronic devices and circuit design covers the fundamentals of circuits involving diodes, bipolar
junction transistors and field effect transistors in a simulation and laboratory environment. The basics of circuit operation
and modeling are covered along with applications to multistage amplifier design. The SPICE software is used as a simulation
tool.

END

Systems and Control I

ECE 09321:

Prerequisites: ECE 09341 (Minimum Grade of C) and ECE 09311

The first course in control systems introduces the fundamental concepts of linearity, time-invariance, stability and the
transfer function. Mathematical and circuit equivalence of different systems (electrical, mechanical, fluidic, and thermal) are
established. A thorough treatment of stability through the Routh-Hurwitz, root locus and Nyquist criterion is given.
Frequency response analysis by means of the Bode plot is also covered. Software simulation primarily with MATLAB and
laboratory experiments will complement and supplement the theory.

END

Systems And Controls II

ECE 09322:

Prerequisites: ECE 09321

This course is a continuation of Systems and Controls I with the focus on multi-input, multi-output systems. The
fundamental concepts of linearity and time-invariance are introduced. The state-space description and the concept of a
matrix transfer function are studied in depth, especially with respect to stability. The concepts of controllability,
observability, and realizations are covered. Numerical techniques are continuously emphasized. Optimal control and
nonlinear systems are also discussed. Software simulation, primarily with MATLAB and laboratory experiments, will
complement and supplement the theory.

END

Signals and Systems

ECE 09341:

Prerequisites: (ECE 09203 minimum of Grade C and MATH 01235) or (ECE 09203 minimum of Grade C and MATH 01210 and
MATH 01231)

Continuous and discrete systems are used in every branch of engineering. Communication systems (for the transmission of
voice, video and data), robotic systems, energy systems, biometric systems (Identification of a person based on physiological
traits), systems that aid the handicapped and system-on-chip circuits are just a few examples that use the fundamental
principles taught in this course. This course provides students with a foundation in linear dynamical systems and provides
the appropriate background to engage in more advanced subjects like controls, signal processing and communications. This
course will discuss the fundamental tools associated with the analysis of continuous (Laplace transform, Fourier transform
and Fourier series) and discrete (z-transform) signals and systems. The concepts of impulse response, frequency response,
and convolution are taught with the appropriate background in complex numbers and variables. Simple analog and digital
filters and their practical uses form a major component of the laboratory component.

END

ECE 09342:

Introduction to Embedded Systems

Prerequisites: ECE 09243 Minimum Grade of C and ECE 09311

With more Embedded systems being sold each year, the demand for Engineers who understand these systems is ever
increasing. This course introduces students to microprocessors and microcontrollers from instruction sets and architecture
to peripherals and software. Several processor architectures and instruction sets are briefly covered as well as assembly
language; however, the majority of the course focuses on embedded software. At the end of this course students will be able
to develop embedded systems to solve real design problems. The focus of this course will be on using embedded peripherals
(analog to digital converters, communications, timers, interrupts, PWM, etc.). Students will work hand on with their own
embedded systems from the beginning of the course and will learn how to design basic embedded systems using modern
integrated development environments. There will be a strong emphasis on project-based learning and each student will be
required to make a significant contribution to a final project.

END

Digital Signal Processing

ECE 09351:

Prerequisites: ECE 09341 Minimum Grade of C

This class is concerned with processing of digital and/or discrete time signals using linear time invariant systems, hence
digital signal processing - DSP. It is DSP that makes communication systems, medical diagnosis and monitoring systems,
engine diagnostics, seismic/tectonic/oceanographic analysis systems, all of audio-visual entertainment systems and many
other countless systems possible. This course has been designed to deepen the real-world perspective at the forefront in
each topic discussed, without sacrificing any of the elegant mathematics that underlies all DSP techniques. The primary
goals of this course are to (1) introduce time and frequency domain concepts and the associated mathematical tools that are
fundamental to all DSP techniques; and (2) provide a thorough understanding and working knowledge of design,
implementation, analysis and comparison of digital filters for processing of discrete time signals. The class will discuss the
following topics: representation of signals and systems in time and frequency domains, the z-transform, filter structures,
filter design and implementation, random signal analysis and spectral estimation, finite word-length effects and wavelet
transforms for time-frequency analysis.

END

Modules In Electrical And Computer Engineering

ECE 09363:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01303

The field of electrical and computer engineering is very diverse and is growing exponentially. This course is designed to
serve as a feedback and feed-forward mechanism not only to reinforce certain topics previously discussed elsewhere in the
curriculum, but also to introduce new and/or emerging topics that are not covered elsewhere in the curriculum. The course
is taught as a series of modules covering topics that are not part of any particular course, (e.g., power systems, smart power
grid), topics to be reinforced, (engineering probability and statistics, random signals, transform techniques), and emerging
topics that are not yet fully integrated into the curriculum. Therefore, different offerings of this course will likely have
different topical content, chosen based on the feedback of the faculty and students during curriculum assessment, as well as
important emerging topics that push the boundaries of electrical and computer engineering.

END

Electrical Engineering Clinic Consultant

ECE 09400:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01202

This course provides an opportunity for consulting work in support of a multidisciplinary clinic project. Work will be
managed by the discipline manager.

END

High Speed Interconnects

ECE 09401:

High speed interconnects are pervasive in electronic systems. From the smallest integrated circuits to the largest
worldwide networks, the ability to interconnect components, subsystems and systems is of critical importance. This course
will provide a fundamental understanding of the various techniques used to achieve high-speed interconnects. Topics to be
covered include: transmission lines, metal waveguides, dielectric waveguides, antennas, and electromagnetic compatibility.

END

ECE 09402:

This course covers special topics in individual areas of Electrical and Computer Engineering. Specific pre-reqs are
determined by the nature of the course when it is announced.

Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering

END

Sustainable Design in Engineering

ECE 09403:

This is a senior level undergraduate elective course that covers the fundamentals of sustainable design in engineering with
an emphasis on electricity and energy. Topics include energy fundamentals (forms, fuels, conversion technologies), energy
use and its impacts on a globalizing economy, life cycle assessment tools and environmental management techniques,
ISO14001 implementation in industry (US vs. European experience), application of sustainable engineering practice via an
eco-design software tool. The student is exposed to sustainable designs in product manufacturing and energy/electricity
production.

END

Principles of Biomedical Systems and Devices

ECE 09404:

Prerequisites: ECE 09311 (Electronics I) AND ECE 09351(Digital Signal Processing).

As a survey of biomedical engineering, this class will introduce various systems of the human physiology from an
engineering perspective. In particular, students will be introduced to signals of biological origin obtained from these
systems; biosensors, transducers and bioelectrodes used to acquire such signals, along with medical quality amplifiers for
measuring biopotentials. Electrical safety of medical devices; measurements of the blood pressure, blood flow, and
respiratory system will also be discussed. Along with a carefully designed set of experiments, this course will provide the
fundamental principles of biomedical engineering from an electrical and mechanical engineering perspective.

END

Product Engineering

ECE 09405:

This course treats product engineering from a variety of perspectives including engineering and non-engineering
viewpoints to explore important elements for modern design. Techniques and tools of rapid prototyping, including virtual
reality, are treated. Important course concepts are reinforced through product design experiences.

END

Forensic Engineering and Product Liability

ECE 09406:

This course examines engineering failure from both the forensics and liability perspectives. Forensic engineering seeks to
discover the reason for product or system failure. Product liability seeks to assign and quantify blame for that failure.
Methods of forensic engineering are presented. The implications of product liability on the design process are considered
from several perspectives. The course is complemented with practical applications.

END

Interaction Design

ECE 09407:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01303

This course examines interaction design from several perspectives. The role of ergonomics is treated along with techniques
of input and output interfacing. Methods and tools for virtual implementation are presented. The course is complemented
with practical applications.

END

Power System Engineering

ECE 09408:

Prerequisites: ECE 09303: Engineering Electromagnetics.

This is an upper level elective course that covers the fundamentals of power system engineering with an emphasis on the
modern electricity grid and new energy technologies. Topics include: history and key inventions in the development of the
electric power industry, mechanical and electromagnetic fundamentals, three-phase circuits and transformers, AC
machinery, synchronous machines and induction motors, DC machines, transmission lines, power flow, system reliability,
advanced generation technologies, utility industry deregulation, and options for a sustainable electric power system in the
future.

END

Introduction to Virtual Reality

ECE 09409:

Prerequisites: ECE Majors: CS 04103 or CS 04113 Non ECE Majors: Permission of Instructor

Introduction to Virtual Reality (VR) covers the architecture of current generation systems for creating 3D VR
environments. Topics included are application/hardware architecture, pipeline development, geometric transformations in a
3D coordinate system, geometry and pixel shading, lighting systems, texturing and VR development. Students will be
exposed to current VR technologies and next generation algorithms.

END

Alternate Energy Systems

ECE 09410:

Prerequisites: ECE 09203

This course will introduce the basics and current trends of the electric power system and electric power industry. Students
will learn methods to mathematically analyze different renewable electric energy systems and evaluate their performance,
economics, and sustainability. Specifically, key basics of wind and solar energy technologies, and their power grid integration
issues will be extensively discussed. Opensource software will also be introduced to the class to assist their study, such as
PVWatt from NREL. Other alternate energy sources, such as CHP, Microturbine, biomass, PHEV, Microgrid, etc. will
also be introduced. After finishing this course, students are expected to be able to conduct a critical analysis of national and
global energy systems.

END

Modern Solid State Devices

ECE 09411:

This is an introductory course in the fundamentals of solid state electronic devices. The course will cover the physical
structure of silicon and compound semiconductor materials and the conduction processes in these materials. The p-n
junction and its applications will be studied along with the principles of transistor devices. The course will address analog
and switching applications and introduce basic laser operations.

END

Electronic Packaging

ECE 09412:

Prerequisites: ECE 09311: Electronics I.

This is an introductory course in the fundamentals of electronic packaging. It focuses on the complex interaction of
materials science, mechanics of materials, and electrical signal processing. The course will progress from the basic materials
used in chip packaging and board construction, through mechanical design and testing, to the electrical modeling of the
interconnect structure, and finally to reliability assessment. The laboratory exercises will mirror this four-part organization
by providing opportunities for laboratory experience in each of the four areas.

END

Principles of Nondestructive Evaluation

ECE 09413:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01303

Principles of nondestructive evaluation provides an introduction to contemporary and emergent methods for the
non-invasive inspection of infrastructure composed of modern engineering materials. The course covers system design and
the processing and analysis of nondestructive evaluation signals. Case studies on engineering design for testing are provided.

END

Very Large Scale Integration Design

ECE 09414:

Prerequisites: ECE 09311

This course provides an introduction to the design and implementation of Very Large Scale Integrated (VLSI) circuits for
complex digital systems with a focus on CMOS technology. Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) and Full-custom
techniques will be explored and used to design basic cells and regular structures such as data-path and memory arrays. The
emphasis is on modern design issues in power, interconnected and clocking. Topics include: VLSI Design Flow;
Transistor-Level CMOS Physical Design; Gate Function and Timing Characteristics; High-Level Digital Functional Blocks;
and CMOS Digital Chip Design. Students will design and verify circuits using commercial Computer Aided Design (CAD)
tools.

END

Fundamentals of Emerging Electricity Market

ECE 09415:

Prerequisites: ECE 09408

This course will provide ECE students with a basic understanding of the power system restructuring, market design, and
pricing mechanisms in different physical and financial electricity markets. Rigorous mathematical formulation and
MATLAB based simulation will provide students with an in-depth understanding on the major differences between the
conventional regulated and the emerging restructured power system operation paradigms, and adequate training to solve the
different system operation problems.

END

Power Electronic Converter Fundamentals

ECE 09416:

Prerequisites: ECE 09311

Upon completion of this class, students will be able to understand working principles of power electronics converters,
select proper power electronics components, build power conversion circuit prototypes, and implement experimental
validations.

END

Fundamental Technologies Towards Green Energy Future

ECE 09417:

There is a transformational change in the electric power systems and electric power industry fueled by renewable “green”
energy sources. This introductory course will provide an overview of the fundamental technologies that enable this
transformation, starting with a review of the current energy sources for electricity generation, including natural gas, nuclear,
hydro, wind, solar, coal, and others. Continuously changing positions of these sources in the electric energy portfolios will be
discussed to illustrate the increased importance of renewable sources. There are, of course, significant challenges that
renewable energy faces, such as low efficiency/high-cost harvesting, uncertainty/intermittency of power output, as well as
system integration issues and their impacts. These challenges will be addressed via solutions using advanced controllers,
smart inverters, and energy storage technologies. Along the way, several key and fundamental concepts will be introduced,
such as power and energy calculation, instantaneous/average/active/reactive power, three-phase systems, power factor,
phasors, network equations, power quality, induction and synchronous machines, which will prepare students to subsequent
courses in this sequence. This course will also include hands-on design projects for harvesting renewable energy.

END

Fundamentals of Wind Energy System Planning and Operation

ECE 09418:

Prerequisite: ECE 09417

Wind energy is one of the most critical green renewable energy sources in the U.S., with significant – and still yet
unrealized – potential for wind power capacity and generation across the nation. Realizing that potential requires financially
viable and physically feasible long-term planning, short-term operation, and real-time control of land-based and offshore
wind farms, which constitute the primary focus of this course. Specifically, this course will introduce HVAC (High Voltage
Alternating Current) and HVDC (High Voltage Direct Current) transmission technologies and compare them to
integrating wind energy projects into the power grid. Specific topics discussed in detail include generation system reliability
and cost analysis, coordinated generation system and transmission system planning, planning under changing market
environments, economic dispatch of wind energy systems, and optimal power flow with wind energy integration. Industrial
power system planning and operation tools aided by a set of hands-on labs that use industry-standard simulation systems
such as MATLAB/Simulink and Opal-RT will also be introduced.

END

Introduction to Systems Engineering

ECE 09421:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01302 or ENGR 01303

Systems Engineering is the interdisciplinary approach and means to enable the realization of today's complex, dynamic 
products and systems. Individual products such as Cell phones, aircraft, automobiles, computers and even household 
appliances are made up of parts developed by many people with varied skill sets, often working for different companies and 
from remote locations. Other systems such as transportation, energy generation and distribution, medical, communications, 
emergency response and similar are very complex as they are composed of many varieties of products and systems. Systems 
Engineering is an integrating function that addresses all the disciplines and specialty groups resutling in a structured 
development process that proceeds from concept to production to operation including maintenance & support, and 
eventual disposal. Systems Engineering considers both the business and the technical needs, including environmental and 
safety, of all customers with the goal of providing a quality product that meets the user needs. It focuses on defining 
customer needs and required functionality early in the development cycle, documenting requirements, proceeding with 
design synthesis and system validation while considering the complete problem that includes - operations, cost & schedule, 
performance, training & support, sustainment, test, disposal, and manufacturing. The course is designed to expose the
student to the system engineering process to complement their technical skill set and to cover topics that are often not
covered in other classes. The course will include frequent guest lecturers who are practicing experts in the systems
engineering domain. The course will utilize the latest in processes and software tools from industry such as SysML modeling
and architectural documentation tools. Students will participate in a semester long project to gain hands-on experience with
the course concepts.

END

Systems and Control II

ECE 09422:

Prerequisites: ECE 09321

This course is a continuation of Systems and Controls I with the focus on multi-input, multi-output systems. The
fundamental concepts of linearity and time-invariance are introduced. The state-space description and the concept of a
matrix transfer function are studied in depth, especially with respect to stability. The concepts of controllability,
observability, and realizations are covered. Numerical techniques are continuously emphasized. Optimal control and
nonlinear systems are also discussed. Software simulation, primarily with MATLAB and laboratory experiments, will
complement and supplement the theory.

END

Introduction to Radar Systems

ECE 09423:

Prerequisites: ECE 09341

This course will provide an introduction to radar systems, range equation and radar signal processing techniques as well as
the nature of physical observables and propagators, the effects of the propagation medium on sensor performance, the
relationship between signals and noise, and the characteristics of critical sensor functions (including detection and tracking).
Radar subsystems will be studied, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, and signal processors.

END

Introduction to War Gaming and C4ISR

ECE 09424:

Prerequisites: Senior Standing

This course will expose students to a comprehensive range of technologies that govern the effectiveness of our nation’s
ability to effectively conduct military operations. It focuses on material drawn from a working group of distinguished
thought leaders in critical technology and operations areas, thereby exposing students to the state-of-the-art thinking and
philosophies. The class material will be enhanced by the study of patents that relate to the subject which were issued to the
courses instructor.

END

Introduction to Command and Control

ECE 09425:

Prerequisites: ECE 09321 or ME 10343

Command and Control (C2) is defined as the exercise of authority and direction over assigned forces in order to
accomplish a mission. This course will embark on a study of C2 information processing and decision making in the context
of adaptive combat systems, as well as civilian and business examples. The course topics discussed in this class include the
following: the history of military C2, C2 decision processes (Observe-Orient-Decide-Act loops), problem sense making
(Identification) and solution finding and implementation processes, operational architectures, information fusion, control
theory, mission success and organizational fitness.

END

Introduction to Weapon Systems

ECE 09426:

Prerequisites: MATH 01230, PHYS 00220

This course will study system engineering principles in the weapon system components and will relate the principles used
in components such as prelaunch decision processing and missile in-flight control functionality to the robustness of the
overall combat system. Missile systems will be studies, including basic aerodynamics and propulsion. The engineering
principles discussed will be used to develop missile guidance laws and track filters to support a robust combat system design.

END

Introduction to Model Based Systems Engineering

ECE 09427:

Prerequisites: ECE 09421

This course is an extension of systems engineering by addressing the needs to better train and prepare students to use
model-based techniques to solve complex design problems. This multi-disciplinary class is designed to use a model-based
systems engineering approach to transform a set of customer needs, expectations, and constraints into a solution and to
support that solution throughout its lifecycle. Students will utilize state of the art commercial software and a
general-purpose modeling language, for developing complex systems composed of hardware, software, information,
personnel, procedures, and/or facilities. Through the use of SySML students will gain an understanding of structural,
behavioral, parametric, and requirements models and their application. Students will also learn how these models can be
used to inform other domain specific activities or subordinate models.

END

Introduction to RF Electronics

ECE 09430:

Prerequisites: ECE 09303

Introduction to RF Electronics covers the fundamental principles behind radio-frequency (RF) design and analysis. Topics
will include distributed parameter analysis, single- and multi-port networks, filter design, matching and bias networks, active
devices, and amplifier design. The course also covers numerical modeling/analysis of RF sub-systems using appropriate
software and laboratory-based measurements. Designing, building, and testing an RF sub-system (of receiver) is part of the
course.

END

Introduction to Optical Fiber Communications

ECE 09431:

Prerequisites: ECE 09311: Electronics I.

Optical communications is an integral part of the world-wide telecommunications system. This course will consider the
numerous technologies that comprise such systems as well as the techniques to design, analyze, simulate, and test such
systems. Topics include: theory of optical waveguiding, waveguide structures, materials, dispersion, signal degradation in
fibers, laser diodes, optical amplifiers, optical coupling, photodetectors, noise, receiver operation, and numerical and
analytical techniques for performance calculations and system evaluation.

END

Wireless Communications

ECE 09432:

Prerequisites: ECE 09351: Digital Signal Processing.

This course will cover the fundamentals of cellular systems, the technologies that are used to implement such systems,
radio propagation effects, modulation techniques and the analysis and systems performance evaluation of wireless links.

END

Electrical Communications Systems

ECE 09433:

Prerequisites: ECE 09351 and ECE 09311

This is a senior level undergraduate course that covers the fundamentals of analog and digital communication systems.
Analog and digital modulation techniques are covered along with optimal receivers, concept of a matched filter, error rate
and intersymbol interference. Appropriate mathematical backfround in Fourier transforms, probability and random
variables are taught. The student is exposed to software and hardware designs.

END

Introduction to Systems on Chips

ECE 09436:

Prerequisites: ECE 09242

This course introduces students to the design principles involved in development of Systems on Chips (SoC). This course
will build the conceptual foundation by discussing the SoC components and prevalent ideas in superscalar computing.
Students will then be exposed to emerging trends in SoC design with hardware accelerators and open-source hardware
development. The skills gained during the course will prepare the students for hardware design jobs in industry.

END

Principles of Microsystems and Microfabrication

ECE 09437:

Prerequisites: ECE 09311

Originally developed for miniaturizing integrated circuits and electronic systems, microfabrication has revolutionized
communications, computers, and consumer electronics. More recently, microfabrication methods have been applied to a
broad spectrum of systems including micro-optics, microfluidics, micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS), and sensors.
This Microsystems and Microfabrication course will provide a comprehensive review of the principles of design, structure,
and operation of microsystems, followed by an in-depth coverage of fabrication technologies for such micro (and nano)
systems including microelectronics, sensors, MEMS, micro-optics, and microfluidics, ultimately leading to lab-on-a-chip
design.

END

Principles of Nanoelectronics, Nanophotonics and Nanotechnology

ECE 09438:

Prerequisites: ECE 09311

This course is an introduction, survey, and case study analysis of nanoscale materials and nanotechnology for electronics,
communication, and energy conversion, including nanodevices, processing, characterization, and applications. The course
will feature coordinated and themed focused studies of fundamental developments in novel materials at the nanoscale, and
their applications to computers, communication, data storage, and sensors. The objectives include familiarizing students
with nanoscale perspectives of materials science in the development materials with tailored properties and functions.
Applications areas include materials for structures, optics, electronics, processing, and biomedical diagnostics and
therapeutics. Topics related to commercialization and intellectual property, as well as environmental, safety, and regulatory
issues will also be discussed.

END

Computer Architecture II: Specialized Systems

ECE 09444:

Prerequisites: ECE 09243

The second course in computer architecture treats architecture elements of special-purpose digital systems. Use of macro
functions is stressed.

END

Architectures for Digital Signal Processing

ECE 09451:

Prerequisites: ECE 09351and ECE 09342

This is a senior level undergraduate elective course that covers the fundamentals of the implementation of digital signal
processing algorithms using special purpose hardware. Topics include fixed and floating point arithmetic, assembly language
programming, sampling, digital filter implementation, finite wordlength effects, quantization noise and fast Fourier
transform implementation. The student is exposed to application designs in communications, speech and image processing.

END

Introduction to Digital Image Processing

ECE 09452:

Prerequisites: ECE 09351

Introduction to Digital Image Processing covers the analysis and contemporaneous applications of the enhancement,
restoration, compression and recognition of monochromatic images. Both classical and state-of-the-art algorithms will be
employed in conjunction with appropriate software for analyzing real-world images.

END

Adaptive Filters

ECE 09453:

Prerequisites: ECE 09351

This is a senior-level undergraduate elective course that covers the fundamentals and implementation of adaptive filtering
algorithms using software and special purpose hardware. Topics include random signals, least-mean squares method,
recursive least squares method, filter structures and finite wordlength effects. The student is exposed to applications in
communications, signal separation, radar, noise cancellation and seismic signal processing.

END

Introduction to Artificial Neural Networks

ECE 09454:

Prerequisites: (MATH 01210 or MATH 01235) and (STAT 02290 or STAT 02286)

This course will provide a theoretical and practical foundation of neural networks for machine learning. Students will learn
about the core challenges and approaches in neural networks. Through a combination of lectures, projects, and written and
coding assignments, students will become well versed in key ideas and techniques for neural networks. The course will
introduce multi-layer perceptrons, convolutional neural networks, recurrent neural networks, generative learning, generative
adversarial networks, topics in gradient-based optimization, and applications of neural networks. Class assignments will
include the implementation of neural networks using Python.

END

ECE 09455:

Introduction to Machine Learning

Prerequisites: (MATH 01210 or MATH 01235) and (STAT 02290 or STAT 02286)

The use of computational approaches to extract information from vast amounts of data and make intelligent decisions
based on that information constitutes the foundation of machine learning, a field that has made a dramatic impact on our
daily lives. From medical diagnosis to recommendation systems, language modeling, autonomous vehicles to speech
identification, machine learning is now everywhere. This course introduces concepts, issues, and algorithms in machine
learning, and will discuss the subject's theoretical and practical aspects. The course will also discuss societal and ethical
considerations for machine learning in practice. Main topics of the course will include basic learning theory, supervised,
unsupervised and semi-supervised learning, ensemble systems, model selection and combination, feature selection, and
performance evaluation techniques. The course will feature assignments and projects that allow students to implement
various classical and emerging machine learning algorithms, and evaluate them on real-world applications.

END

Embedded Software Design

ECE 09456:

Prerequisites: ECE 09342

Embedded systems dramatically enhance our lives and are prolific in our everyday life. It is not uncommon for us to come
in contact with over one hundred embedded systems each day. With billions of embedded systems being produced each year
there is a huge need for engineers who can create good embedded software. This course focuses on embedded software for
applications running directly on an embedded processor without an operating system. A brief survey of microcontroller
technologies will be covered but the class will focus on ARM microcontrollers and the embedded peripherals available on
such devices. Advanced embedded communication technologies (CAN,WIFI, Bluetooth, ZigBee, etc.) will be surveyed and
at least one implemented during the courses. A great emphasis will be put on good programming practices and design
patterns which support working in large groups.

END

Introduction to Biometric Systems

ECE 09457:

Prerequisites: ECE 09351

Biometrics is the science of recognizing and authenticating people using their physiological and/or behavioral
characteristics. By using biometrics, it is possible to establish an identity based on “who you are”, rather than by “what you
possess” (e.g., an ID card) or “what you remember” (e.g., a password). Interest in biometrics has increased significantly with a
global market that is experiencing very rapid growth. Border and immigration control, restricted access to facilities and
information systems, cybersecurity, crime investigations and forensic analysis are just a few of the primary application areas
of biometrics used by commercial, government and law enforcement agencies. There is much research interest in different
biometric systems with the main issues being high performance, ease of use and implementation, low cost and high user
acceptance. This course involves the study and design of various biometric systems (fingerprints, voice, face, iris and other
modalities). Multibiometric systems are also covered. This includes feature fusion, classifier fusion and systems that use two
or more biometric modalities. Biometric system performance and issues related to the security, ethics and privacy aspects of
these systems will also be addressed.

END

Introduction to Reinforcement Learning

ECE 09458:

Prerequisites: (MATH 01210 or MATH 01235) and (STAT 02290 or STAT 02286)

This course will provide a solid introduction to the field of RL, and students will learn about the core challenges and
approaches, including generalization and exploration. Through a combination of lectures, and written and coding
assignments, students will become well versed in key ideas and techniques for RL. The course will introduce fundamental
concepts of RL, including Markov Decision and Reward Processes, Dynamic Programming, Model-Free Learning,
Temporal Difference, Monte Carlo search, on-policy control, off-policy methods, and policy gradient methods. Class
assignments will include implementation of basic as well as advanced RL algorithms using TensorFlow topics. Besides,
students will advance their understanding and the field of RL through a final project again using TensorFlow libraries.

END

Clinic Consultant in Electrical and Computer Engineering

ECE 09461:

Corequisites: ENGR 01403

Clinic Consultant in Electrical and Computer Engineering provides a unique mechanism for students to learn and apply
fundamental concepts and skills in consulting and entrepreneurship. The course, taken twice in each semester of the senior
year, allows students to identify their unique skills, find a proper client and a multidisciplinary clinic project to market those
skills, and provide consulting services to those clients and projects. Work will be jointly managed by the course instructor
and clinic project manager as the client.

END

Systems, Devices, and Algorithms in Bioinformatics

ECE 09466:

Prerequisites: ECE 09351 (Digital Signal Processing).

Bioinformatics is the field of applying computational techniques, from mathematics, statistics, and machine learning, to
the vast amounts of biological - but most specifically genomic - data. While some refer to bioinformatics only in the context
of collection, storage, organization and access of such biological data within large databases, this course's view of
bioinformatics will include - in fact focus on - systems and devices that generate such data, and development of
methodologies and models to analyze the vast quantities of data generated by such systems and devices. The course will
provide basic biological background of genomics, will introduce the students to commonly used bioinformatics databases
and computational tools (such as search, alignment, and protein visualization tools) used to analyze genomic data from such
databases. The focus of the course will be on basic bioinformatics systems and devices, such as high throughput next
generation sequencers and genechips, followed by an in-depth discussion of the theory of basic genomic signal processing
and computational intelligence techniques used in bioinformatics, including hidden Markov models and optimization
algorithms for sequence alignment and gene prediction, clustering and classification algorithms.

END

Introduction to Discrete Event Systems

ECE 09468:

Prerequisites: ECE Majors: ECE 09243 Non ECE Majors: Permission of Instructor

This course introduces fundamentals of discrete event system models and their applications in modeling, control, analysis,
co-design, validation, manufacturing/de-manufacturing processes, communication networks, and transportation, etc. 
The mathematical and graphical models include graphs, finite state machine, Petri Nets, timed models, stochastic timed 
models, and Markov chains, etc.

END

Introduction to System-On-Chip Verification

ECE 09469:

Prerequisites: ECE Majors: ECE 09243 NonECE Majors: Permission of Instructor

This course introduces fundamentals of hardware design verification, including traditional functional simulation and
assertion-based verification. Topics covered include functional simulation, coverage metrics, testbench design and
automation, and assertion-based verification. Property specification language (PSL) is also introduced.

END

Instrumentation

ECE 09471:

Prerequisites: ECE 09311: Electronics I.

Elements of instrumentation systems are treated including transducers, signal conditioning, and signal processing.
Elements of modern instrumentation systems including standards (IEEE-488, SCPI) and smart sensors are considered.
Course is complemented with an instrumentation application.

END

Smart Grid

ECE 09472:

Prerequisites: ECE 09342 AND ECE 09321

The ways in which electricity is generated, transmitted, distributed, stored, and used, are the subject of revolutionary and
evolutionary changes compared to the electricity grid we have today. Smart Grid goals include the improvement of grid
reliability, reduction in outages, faster return on service, ability to integrate a broad range of renewable energy sources, and
to include customers in the ability to effect load decisions based on grid demand and energy pricing. This course will address
grid fundamentals, tools and technologies, and then address major Smart Grid subsystems including conventional and
alternative generation, storage technologies, transmission and distribution systems, standards, demand management,
real-time pricing, grid stability, control technologies, measurement including Smart Sensors and Advanced Metering
Intrastructure. Physical and cyber vulnerabilities will also be addressed. The course will include a project to reinforce Smart
Grid elements and involve students in this technology, which has significant international economic implications.

END

Smart Sensors

ECE 09473:

Prerequisites: ECE 09342 AND ECE 09311 AND ECE 09321

Elements of Smart Sensors and Smart Sensor systems are treated. Instrumentation fundamentals covered include
transducers, signal conditioning, and data acquisition, communication, along with important considerations and associated
standards. Relationship of smart sensors to integrated system health monitoring (ISHM) and similar Intelligent Sensor
applications are addressed. The course will include a project to reinforce Smart Sensor elements.

END

Electricity Supply Procurement

ECE 09474:

Prerequisites- Senior Standing

This course is a study of energy procurement in a highly competitive, open market. Topics include fundamentals of power,
product design for end users, and energy purchasing to minimize risk and maximize cost savings. This course also discusses
techniques to derive bidding strategies in the real-time and day-ahead market, as well as techniques for writing proper
specifications.

END

Introduction to Internet of Things

ECE 09480:

Prerequisites: ECE 09342

Internet of Things (IoT) is a network of connected devices with sensing, processing and actuating capabilities. These
devices play an increasingly important role, and in fact control many of aspects of our daily lives. IOT devices are commonly
used in home automation, automotive, security, communications and seemingly endless list of other applications. This
course provides a comprehensive review of IoT devices including their hardware architectures, communication protocols,
power requirements and other important aspects of the IoT infrastructure. Specific topics discussed in this course include
IoT wireless communications protocols that provide low power, low bandwidth, low cost specifications that enable small
sensing devices to transmit data over long distances and obstacles while running on battery power for many years. This
course covers aspects of RF, sensor hardware, data transmission, network layout, and a brief introduction to data receiving
applications. This course also includes a major project component, allowing the students to implement various concepts
discussed in the class.

END

Backplane Design

ECE 09481:

This course provides an overview of backplane design for a variety of digital systems. It surveys current technologies with
treatment of emerging and updated standards. Methods of analysis, synthesis, and verification of backplane systems are
presented. The course is complemented with project work for typical applications.

END

Introduction to Memristors and Nanoelectronic VLSI

ECE 09482:

Prerequisites: ECE 09243

This course is an advanced course in the extension of analog/digital electronic systems, dealing with CMOS devices and
emerging nanoelectronic devices and technologies. Since the importance of emerging nano systems goes beyond traditional
circuit theory and EE in general, this course aims to provide students with an opportunity of understanding the fundamental
concepts of a set of emerging nanodevices, with particular emphases on memristors and memristive systems, and their
potential applications and impacts on the next generation VLSI systems. The course will also emphasize hands-on
programming and application to examples as an important means to understand and benefit from the material. Software
tools such as Matlab/SPICE/Cadence will be extensively used throughout the learning and design experiments.

END

Digital Design with VDHL

ECE 09483:

The course uses VHDL to model and simulate digital systems. Specialized features of the language are presented to allow
getting optimum results from simulations. Example VHDL applications are explored and a project is used to complement
the course.

END

Mixed Signal Technology

ECE 09484:

This course will extend the student's background in circuit design to include the devices and technologies used in mixed
analog-digital VLSI chips for high volume applications such as hard-disk drives, cordless telephones and TVs. The course
will begin with device models, fabrication technology and layout as applied to mixed analog-digital circuits. Device modeling
requirements for analog work will be covered as well as models used in most modern circuit simulators. Fabrication
technologies will be examined that have been developed specifically for mixed signal VLSI chips. The techniques for layout
of mixed signal circuits that emphasize a high degree of analog device matching and minimum digital-to-analog interference
will be covered.

END

Introduction to Engineering Cyber Security

ECE 09485:

Prerequisites: ECE 09243: Computer Architecture

This course addresses the need to better prepare students for the expansion in the interest of Things (loT) by imparting
fundamental concepts and capabilities in the management of cyber security. Cyber security is key to developing large-scale,
wide-area systems, which can provide the degree of security required to further implementation highly vulnerable,
highly-visible systems such as the Smart Grid. To gain this understanding, the course addresses a number of key
components: standards including network and encryption techniques (RSA, etc.) and security processes, methods of cyber
attack, and some methods of software and hardware security enhancement. Course principles are reinforced by a significant

END

Introduction ot Portable Platform Development

ECE 09486:

Prerequisites: ECE 09243 and CS 04103 or CS 04113

The total number of Android and IOS devices is estimated to be over 1.6 billion devices (2013) and continues to grow. The
ubiquitous nature of these devices means that they are now the default choice of platforms for hardware and software
developers. This course details the ARM core architecture, which underpin the majority of mobile devices, along with the
basic operation system and application software environments. Principles of effective app development using available SDK
tools and project management techniques are presented. The hardware vs. software trade space will also be considered. The
course content is reinforced with a significant development project.

END

Intro to IoT Hardware Engineering and Security

ECE 09487:

Internet of Things (IoT), a network that connects "smart" devices with sensing and processing capabilities to other similar
devices and to humans, is growing rapidly and controls many aspects of our daily lives. Today, IoT devices can be found not
only in a broad spectrum of daily use applications such as home automation and security, home appliances, and automotive
industry, but also in critical infrastructure such as power and energy systems, healthcare and medical devices, as well as
military systems. As the use of IoT devices grow rapidly, so does the vulnerability of the systems that rely on them against
malicious attacks. This course will cover many aspects of IoT with a focus on security hardening primarily with respect to
IoT hardware, as well as software function and operation. This course will provide a deeper understanding of the
engineering behind IoT embedded systems and insight into security hardening of IoT hardware as it relates to IoT
architectures, firmware, and application software. The course will discuss asset management and top security challenges,
including but not limited to the lack of compliance within various IoT original equipment manufacturers, the lack of user
knowledge and awareness and the consequential lack of update management and challenges of hardening assets. The course
will also discuss the vulnerability of IoT architectures to various attacker types, attack vectors, and rogue IoT devices, as
well as known and potential defensive mechanisms to mitigate that vulnerability.

END

Introduction to Cloud Hardware Architecture and Security

ECE 09488:

An increasing number of software applications are no longer installed in the end-user's machine. Rather these software
applications reside in - and accessed from - the cloud, a term loosely represents the internet, but more specifically refers to
the software developer's servers. Such an arrangement relieves the end user from the need to invest in expensive hardware
that is possibly under or over specified for the application needed. However, using the cloud comes at a different cost:
concern over speed, access and - most importantly - security. This course will provide the essential background needed to
understand cloud hardware infrastructure, with a focus on architectures needed to protect and secure critical information
technology (IT), operational technology (OT), and other high value technology assets, whether on-premise or in the cloud.
The course will also discuss securing data and mission-critical applications in the cloud using secure architectures, from
building respective architectures for each impact level (IL) and on obtaining approvals within respective industry
compliance regulations.

END

Emerging Topics in Computer Engineering

ECE 09490:

Prerequisites: Specific prerequisites are determined by the nature of the course content when it is announced.

This course covers special topics in emerging areas of Computer Engineering such as Computer Networks, Mobile
Robotics, and Embedded Systems. Specific pre-reqs are determined by the nature of the course when it is announced.

END

ECE 09495:

Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence, Machine Learning and Data
Mining

Prerequisites: ECE 09455 or ECE 09454

As the amount of data we generate grow astronomically, so does the need for approaches, algorithms, techniques and the
hardware that can be used for effective processing, storing, and analysis of such massive volumes of data. Computational
intelligence, machine learning and data mining all deal with automated analysis of large volumes of data in search of known
or hidden structures, aptterns and information. While well-established approaches that now form the foundations of these
topics are discussed in other specifically named courses, this course will provide an introductory treatment of emerging
topics - fueled by rapid growth of research and development in these areas - but that have not yet reached the mainstream
textbooks. Hence, due to its very nature, the specific content of this class will be different every time it is offered, focusing
on the most recent developments in these areas.

END

Seminar: Engineering Frontiers

ECE 09498:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01403 (can be taken concurrently)

The Seminar in Engineering Frontiers will provide students with a glimpse into contemporaneous cutting edge technology
and research in electrical and computer engineering. Course content and topics will change with each offering to maintain
currency with the frontiers of engineering technology.

END

Co-op Experience in Electrical and Computer Engineering

ECE 09499:

Prerequisites: Senior standing and Major in Electrical and Computer Engineering, or permission of instructor

Co-op Experience in Electrical and Computer Engineering provides an opportunity for students to participate in a
research or development experience in an industrial or other relevant non-academic setting. This course may be used to
satisfy one ECE technical elective for a maximum of 3 s.h. credit.

END

Nanoelectronics, Nanophotonics and Nanotechnology

ECE 09538:

This course is an introduction, survey, and case study analysis of nanoscale materials and nanotechnology for electronics,
communication, and energy conversion, including nanodevices, processing, characterization, and applications. The course
will feature coordinated and themed focused studies of fundamental developments in novel materials at the nanoscale, and
their applications to computers, communication, data storage, and sensors. The objectives include familiarizing students
with nanoscale perspectives of materials science in the development materials with tailored properties and functions.
Applications areas include materials for structures, optics, electronics, processing, and biomedical diagnostics and
therapeutics. Topics related to commercialization and intellectual property, as well as environmental, safety, and regulatory
issues will also be discussed. This graduate level course will also provide the opportunity for students to explore additional
and emerging topics in nanoelectronics.

END

Machine Learning

ECE 09555:

This class will introduce a broad spectrum of pattern recognition algorithms along with various statistical data analysis and
optimization procedures that are commonly used in such algorithms. Although mathematically intensive, pattern
recognition is nevertheless a very application driven field. This class will therefore cover both theoretical and practical
aspects of pattern recognition. The topics discussed will include Bayes decision theory for optimum classifiers, parametric
and nonparametric densityestimation techniques, discriminant analysis, basic optimization techniques, introduction to
basic neural network structures, and unsupervised clustering techniques. As a graduate level course, several advanced and
contemporary topics will also be covered, including fuzzy inference systems, support vector machines, adaptive resonance
theory, incremental learning and online learning and particle swarm optimization. Students will be expected to conduct
independent research for possible publications, as part of the class project.

END

Electrical Circuits I

EET 03121:

Corequisites: MATH 01122

This course focuses on the basic principles of direct and alternating current and on the properties of passive electrical
components. The course covers atomic theory, current, voltage, resistance, resistive networks, network theorems, work,
power capacitance, inductance and transformers. Laboratory exercises include building circuits from schematics, using
laboratory equipment to make measurements, and to verify theory. Circuit analysis software is used to simulate and verify
the laboratory analysis where appropriate.

END

EET 03222:

Electrical Circuits II

Prerequisites: EET 03121 AND MATH 01122

This course covers the fundamentals of AC electrical circuits. It focuses on series/parallel RLC circuits, voltage and
impedance phasor diagrams, power in AC circuits, filters, resonance, frequency Response, and BODE plots. There is a final
project with a written report and an oral presentation.

END

Semiconductor Electronics

EET 03230:

Prerequisites: EET 03222 AND MATH 01122

This course introduces the characteristics, operation, and application of solid state devices including diodes and bipolar
and MOS field effect transistors. It covers diodes, power supplies, the transistor switch, and DC and AC analysis of various
types of amplifiers. These include the bipolar common emitter, common collector, power amps, and MOS field effect
transistor amplifiers. Laboratory experiments cover the course topics and verify lecture theory.

END

Robotics and Motion Control

EET 03251:

This class provides a comprehensive foundation of robotics and industrial automation systems for flexible manufacturing.
The class will survey the robotics technology landscape, and provide an understanding of both industrial and commercial
robotics in industrial manufacturing. This course will provide a hands-on experience for use and integration of sensors and
actuators in production systems, as well as simulation and programming of industrial robotics systems.

END

EET 03300:

This is a special topics course intended to provide a mechanism for students to take an early elective that focuses on
relevant topics of engineering technology.

Technology Focus Elective

END

Analog Integrated Circuits

EET 03332:

Prerequisites: EET 03230

This course focuses on the characteristics and applications of analog integrated circuits including operational amplifiers
and specialized linear integrated circuits. It investigates circuits including inverting, non-inverting and differential
amplifiers, non-linear circuits, active filters, equalizers, oscillators, timers, and power supply regulator IC’s. Laboratory
experiments cover the above topics and verify lecture theory. Circuit analysis software is used to simulate and verify the
laboratory analysis where appropriate.

END

Emerging Topics in EET

EET 03400:

This is a special topics course intended to provide a mechanism for students to take classes in new and emerging topics
that relate to electrical engineering technology. Every separate section and offering of this class will focus on different, new
and emerging topics. For each such topic, the current state of the technology, its shortcomings and how those shortcomings
are addressed with the emerging technology will be discussed. Ethical considerations and other unintended consequences of
the emerging technology will also be discussed. The pre-reqs of this class will also depend on the specific topics covered
in each section or offering.

END

Fundamentals of the Construction Industry I

CM 01301:

Corequisites: CM 01302

This course provides a general overview of the planning, administration, management, and cost of construction projects
and an introduction to the methodology used in executing specific designs. Emphasis is placed on the organization of
construction firms, use and types of primary construction equipment, estimating and quantity take-offs, contractual and
management systems, scheduling, project administration, and inspection of construction operations.

END

Fundamentals of the Construction Industry II

CM 01302:

Prerequisite: CM 01301 (may be taken concurrently)

This course introduces the design process and development of construction documents. It covers the standard design
phases: programming, conceptual design, schematic design, design development, construction documents and construction
administration, and the format and utilization of project manuals including contract specifications, the interpretation and
analysis of engineering plans and specifications, and the new technologies being used in the design including Building
Informational Modeling (BIM) and sustainable (green) practices. The course also explores the various common project
delivery methods.

END

Project Building Systems

CM 01303:

Prerequisites: CM 01301, CM 01302

Students will learn the description and identification of the equipment and materials used in mechanical systems for
heating, ventilating and air conditioning, electrical, plumbing, fire protection, piping, gas, lighting, water and waste water,
conveyance, life safety systems, environmental, security, audio/visual, and building system controls. The course also provides
and introduction to building structural and envelopes systems.

END

CM 01304:

Project Administration

Prerequisites: CM 01304 (Fundamentals of the Construction Industry II ).

This course provides exposure to and use of various types of projects control systems for project efficiency and
documentation. Students will learn how the submittal process operates and is monitored. They will also be shown a variety
of tools used in tracking project documentation, and essential elements related to contract law and administration.

END

CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATING

CM 01305:

Prerequisites: CM 01302 (Fundamentals of the Construction Industry II )

Introduction to various costs of construction including direct and indirect project costs, comparison of hard and soft costs,
job cost analysis and forecasting of cost to completion, labor, material and equipment expenses, cash flow, overhead,
profitability, and general conditions costs. Students will learn research techniques used to create accurate estimating and
bidding procedures.

END

Construction Project Planning and Scheduling

CM 01306:

Prerequisites: CM 01301, CM 01302

Students will learn procedures used in project planning and scheduling that employ float methods of scheduling logic. They
will examine the critical path series of activities of project completion, including the use of computer software applications
for problem solving, and related tools, spreadsheets, and information management. Also covered are work breakdown
structures, activity durations, status reports, resource allocation, re-planning, monitoring, and updating of projects. Students
will develop projects site logistics plans.

END

Advanced Leadership and Communication

CM 01407:

Prerequisites: CM 01302 (Fundamentals of the Construction Industry II )

The course is designed to teach students to become more effective leaders and communicators in the construction
industry. Drawing on various case studies, students will examine ethical practices in the industry. They will define and
role-play effective communications strategies that simulate situations they may encounter within the industry such as
general-to-subcontractor, corporate, and labor relations. Students in this course will also examine principles of negotiation
and dispute resolution in the construction industry.

END

Industrial Relations in the Construction Industry

CM 01408:

Prerequisites: CM 01302 (Fundamentals of the Construction Industry II ).

This course examines various perspectives (union, management, government) on the collective bargaining system in place
in the construction industry. Topics include the legal and regulatory environment, problem solving, and the roles of labor
and corporations.

END

Building Energy Systems for Construction Managers

CM 01409:

Prerequisites: CM 01302

The Building Energy Systems for Construction Managers course provides a conceptual understanding of functions and
performances of energy systems including mechanic al, electrical, electronic, and plumbing and transport systems in
residential and commercial buildings. The course also provides information on integration between energy systems and
other building components. While introducing the concepts of alternative energy sources, energy efficiency, structural
implications of mechanical systems, indoor air quality, and environmental control strategies, the course familiarizes students
with more recent and current efforts in sustainability and green building ideas. The course also introduces codes and
standards relevant to energy devices used in building construction, such as National Fire Protection Association (NFPA),
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE), and National Electrical Code
(NEC).

END

BUILD CONSTRUCTION SYS & CODES

CM 01410:

Prerequisites: CM 01302 (Fundamentals of the Construction Industry II ).

This course provides a conceptual understanding of functions and performance of structural building systems. The primary
purpose of this course is to provide familiarity with use of construction code with reference to International Building Codes
(IBC) 2012. For anyone in the field of construction or construction management it is necessary to know about the concepts
and fundamental aspects of the code. As a result, the course is intended to provide an understanding of how the code was
developed, how it is to be interpreted, and how it is applied to design and construction of buildings, the goal of the course is
to make implementation of the code easier, and clearer to understand. Other than discussions on structural elements and
their construction methods, the course covers issues such as use and occupancy, types of construction, fire-resistive
constructions, interior finishes, building material, inspections, and tests.

END

Construction Safety and Loss Prevention

CM 01411:

Prerequisites: CM 01302 (Fundamentals of the Construction Industry II ).

This course offers a practical guide for eliminating safety and health hazards from construction worksites. The Handbook
of OSHA Construction Safety and Health addressed the occupational safety and health issues faced by those working in the
construction industry. The course covers a vast range of issues including program development, safety and health program
implementation, intervention, and prevention of construction incidents, regulatory hazards faced by those working in the
construction industry and sources of information. The course also features updates for construction regulations,
construction job audit, training requirements, and OSHA regulations. It includes new record keeping guidelines and forms
with additional material on focused inspections. Containing updated contact information for the newest agencies, the
course also presents a model safety and health program, examples of accident analysis and prevention approaches.

END

Capstone Project - WI

CM 01412:

Prerequisites: CM 01303 and CM 01304 and CM 01305 and CM 01306 and CM 01408 and CM 01409 and CM 01410 and CM 01411;
Corequisites: CM 01407 (may be taken concurrently)

In the course, students will build on what they have learned in the major, integrating the theory and knowledge that they
gained in class with practical experience in the construction industry. Capstone projects are developed through a series of
project meetings between the student and program faculty, with significant written deliverables.

END

First-Year Engineering Clinic I

ENGR 01101:

An introduction to the practice of engineering through authentic, multidisciplinary problems and projects. Sustainability is
used to demonstrate the broader context of engineering work. The importance of diversity and inclusion in engineering
work is addressed. Course topics include: academic success strategies, engineering skills, engineering communication,
computer-based tools, entrepreneurial mindset, engineering design, and teamwork.

END

First-Year Engineering Clinic II

ENGR 01102:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01101 with minimum Grade of D- Corequisites: MATH 01130

A continuation of First-Year Engineering Clinic I focused on product design that considers the needs of the customer.
The course provides expanded treatment of the practice of engineering through authentic, multidisciplinary projects.
Project work reinforces the following topics: statistics, economics, computer-based tools, entrepreneurial mindset,
engineering design, teamwork, diversity, inclusion, and ethics.

END

ENGR 01201:

Sophomore Engineering Clinic I

Prerequisites: ENGR 01102 and COMP 01111 and PHYS 00220 and MATH 01131

This course, a continuation of the Engineering Clinic series, provides expanded treatment of the practice of engineering
through applications drawn from various engineering disciplines and industry. Project work includes a variety of technical
communication topics, analytic and computer-based tools, including the design process, engineering ethics, safety and
teamwork. The composition component presents critical thinking, reading, writing, research and argumentation.

END

Sophomore Engineering Clinic II

ENGR 01202:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01201

This course is a continuation of the Engineering Clinic sequence that provides design and design support experiences. The
clinic also integrates information from supporting courses. The goal of the public speaking component is to enable students
to participate effectively in oral communication, especially as related to technical presentations.

END

Sophomore Engineering Clinic Project

ENGR 01203:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01102 and COMP 01111and PHYS 00220 and MATH 01131

This course, a continuation of the Engineering Clinic series, provides expanded treatment of the practice of engineering
through applications drawn from various engineering disciplines and industry. Project work includes a variety of technical
communication topics, analytic and computer-based tools, including the design process, engineering ethics, safety and
teamwork. The course also includes a significant emphasis on information literacy, technical report writing, and technical
presentations.

END

Engineering in a Global Context

ENGR 01217:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01101

This course examines how engineering is related with larger economic, social, cultural, and technological dynamics in an
era of increased globalization. Students will get a better understanding and appreciation of what engineering is, how
engineers are trained, what engineers do, and how engineering and culture interact. The course approaches these themes
through discussions of: the relation and interaction of engineering, science, technology, and society; the history and
development of the engineering profession; ethical decision making in engineering; and professional practice in
cross-cultural contexts. The last part of the course is focused on preparing students for an intensive, mandatory 2-week
study tour of a particular country (e.g., China) that will occur during Spring break or Maymester (at faculty’s discretion and is
trip dependent).

END

Statics

ENGR 01271:

Prerequisites: MATH 01131 and PHYS 00220

The course deals with the study of engineering statics which includes the statics of structural systems. The study of
structural systems includes equilibrium, structural analysis, and geometric properties of structural members.

END

Solid Mechanics

ENGR 01272:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01271

The course deals with the study of solid mechanics including stress and strain, mechanical properties of materials, and
beam and bar analysis. The study of beam and bars includes axial forces, torsion, bending, shear, combined loading, buckling,
and design.

END

Strength Of Materials

ENGR 01273:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01271

The course presents the theory and analytical techniques used in the design and analysis of engineered structural
components. The course addresses the principles of stress and strain, mechanical properties of materials, and beam and bar
analysis. The study of structural components includes axial forces, torsion, bending, shear, combined loading, buckling, and
design. Concepts such as principal stresses, Hooke's Law for plane stress, and failure criteria are introduced.

END

Material Science

ENGR 01281:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00220 and CHEM 06100

This course develops the material structure and property relations. Atomic bonding, lattice structures, crystalline and
polymeric structures and properties, imperfections, dislocations, phase diagrams, and quantitative analysis are presented.
Properties of metals and alloys, ceramics, polymers, composites, and electrical materials are discussed.

END

Manufacturing Processes

ENGR 01282:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01281

This course develops the fabrication processes for engineering materials. Discussion of heat treatment of metals will be
followed by manufacturing methods for metals and alloys. Casting, powder metallurgy, hot and cold forming, welding and
joining, and material removal techniques for metals will be followed by fabrication techniques for non-metals, ceramics, and
composites.

END

Materials Science And Manufacturing

ENGR 01283:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06100

This course is intended to give students a strong background in materials science and manufacturing. The course covers
the behavior of materials, starting from an atomic level, and building to how atomic level structures influence macroscopic
failure in both metals and polymers. The rheology of various materials becomes the transition into how they are developed
into useful products through various manufacturing methods including casting, extrusion, molding, sintering, machining and
through composite fabrication techniques.

END

Dynamics

ENGR 01291:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01271

Study of kinematics and kinetics of a particle, including work-energy and impulse-momentum methods. Systems of
particles are considered. Kinematics and kinetics of plane motion of rigid bodies are introduced with respect to absolute and
relative motions in various reference frames. Concept of mass moment of inertia is introduced.

END

ENGR 01299:

This course is designed to introduce students to emerging topics in the engineering field. Consent of the instructor is
necessary, and pre-reqs are determined by the nature of the topic.

Special Topics In Engineering

END

Junior Engineering Clinic

ENGR 01303:

Prerequisites: (ENGR 01202 or ENGR 01203 and COMP 01112 and CMS 04205) and (MATH 01235 or MATH 01210 and
MATH 01231) and (BME 11301 or CHE 06202 or CHE 06203 or ECE 09311 or ENGR 01272 or ENGR 01273 or ENGR 01291)

This is one course in a sequence of courses that will provide a meaningful research and design experience for a team of
undergraduate students under the direction of an engineering faculty advisor. The research topic will be chosen by mutual
agreement of the undergraduate students and their advisor. The sequence will include a thorough literature search and
review, the development of a clear and concise problem statement, consultations with other faculty and professional
experts, and the derivation of publishable results. The research will culminate in a final written report and oral presentation.

END

Fluid Mechanics I

ENGR 01341:

Prerequisites: MATH 01230 and PHYS 00220 and (CHE 06201 with min C- grade or ENGR 01271)

The course deals with general fluid flow and with fluid flow in pipe systems. Topics covered in the area of general fluid flow
include hydrostatics, laws of fluid motion, kinematics, dynamics, energy balance, and dimensionless groups. Topics covered
in the area of pipe flow include incompressible flow, compressibility, pumps, viscosity, boundary layers, turbulence, and
losses. The course includes appropriate laboratory experiments and computer applications.

END

Engineering Fluid Mechanics

ENGR 01342:

Prerequisites: MATH 01230 and PHYS 00220 and (CHE 06201 with min C- grade or ENGR 01271)

This course is designed for multidisciplinary engineering students required to have an introductory knowledge of fluid
flow. This course includes all of the topics of Fluid Mechanics I (ENGR 01.341) and is equivalent to ENGR 01.341. Topics
covered in the area of general fluid flow include hydrostatics, Mass and Energy Balances, incompressible inviscid and viscous
flows, momentum balances and dimensionless groups. Topics covered in the area of pipe flow include incompressible and
compressible flows, fluid machinery including pumps and turbines, viscous flows, boundary layers, turbulence, and pressure
losses. The course includes appropriate laboratory experiments and computer applications.

END

Independent Study In Engineering

ENGR 01391:

This course is designed for engineering students. They will conduct work under the supervision of an appropriate faculty
member on engineering projects. The execution of the proposed project, including the preparation and presentation of an
acceptable report of work, will be required.

END

Senior Engineering Clinic - WI

ENGR 01403:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01303 and (CHE 06316 orCEE 08361 or BME 11303 or ECE 09321 or ME 10310 or ENGR 10273 or ENT
06450)

This course provides a culminating experience to the Engineering Clinic sequence. The goal of this sequence of courses is
to give teams of undergraduate engineering students a meaningful, leading-edge, team-based, multidisciplinary engineering
project experience. The sequence will include a thorough literature search and review, the development of a clear and
concise problem statement, consultations with other faculty and professional experts, and delivery of a final written report
and oral presentation.

END

Introduction To Finite Element Analysis

ENGR 01410:

Prerequisites: (ENGR 01272 or ENGR 01273) and MATH 01235

Fundamental concepts for the development of finite element analysis are introduced. The element stiffness matrices are
developed using shape functions defined on the elements. Aspects of global stiffness formation, consideration of boundary
conditions, and nodal load calculations are presented. Mesh division and problem modeling considerations are discussed in
detail. Topics of scalar field problems and natural frequency analysis are covered. Computer applications are included.

END

Instrumentation and Measurement

EET 03330:

Prerequisites: EET 03230

Instrumentation is needed to monitor and control engineering development and manufacturing processes. An
instrumentation and measurement background provides the foundation needed to be effective in a wide range of application
environments. Importance of metrology to the ISO-certified environment is also addressed.

END

Embedded Systems and the Internet of Things

EET 03340:

Prerequisites: ECE 09241 and EET 03230

The Internet of Things (IoT) is a rapidly growing segment of technology, which emphasizes devices capable of sensing and
control that are accessed via a network or cloud. This course provides students with an introduction to embedded systems
and the Internet of Things. The course contains a significant laboratory component.

END

Applied Digital Signal Processing

EET 03350:

Prerequisites: MATH 01131

Digital signal processing is ubiquitous, finding applications ranging from automotive to telecommunications as examples.
Processor architectures have been optimized to perform key DSP operations to improve performance beyond that available
from general-purpose computer architectures. An understanding of the discrete-time theory underlying implementation of
filtering and signal analysis positions the student to develop and maintain DSP-based systems.

END

Rapid Prototyping and Fabrication

EET 03360:

Prerequisites: EET 03330 and EET 03332

Rapid prototyping and fabrication tools are key to accelerating product concepts to the marketplace. Rapid prototyping
focuses on development of sample parts used to validate design approaches; rapid fabrication tools make parts that are
suitable for production. All of these are critically important to maintain competitiveness. This course contains a significant
design project that uses the latest in rapid prototyping equipment.

END

Control Systems and Programmable Logic Controllers

EET 03370:

Prerequisites: EET 03340

Control of manufacturing processes is key to producing high-quality manufacturing throughput. Programmable Logic
Controllers (PLCs) are used widely as the approach to control the automation of manufacturing processes. Understanding
the basics of control theory combined with the practical application to PLCs prepares students for leadership roles in
industrial automation.

END

Applied Communication Systems

EET 03380:

Prerequisites: EET 03350

Modern design and manufacturing environments rely on a variety of communication backbones. Wired and wireless
communication connect system elements with the control systems and operators that maintain the overall process. This
course provides students with an introduction to modern communication systems from the standpoint of electrical
engineering technology.

END

Electric Power and Energy Systems

EET 03390:

Prerequisites: EET 03332

Electric power and energy conversion systems are elements important to the well-being and advancement of society, and
are the backbones of industry. Understanding the basics of power systems prepares a student to compete for positions in the
power industry as well as a broad array of other industries.

END

Project Management

EET 03490:

Prerequisites: EGR 02352

Project management is an important skill to ensure that complex projects are properly scoped and mapped into available
resources. Use of project management tools ensures that projects will be completed on time and on budget.

END

Junior Technology Clinic I

EGR 02351:

Prerequisites: EGR 02216 AND MTH 118 AND ENGR 01273 OR EET 03222

This is the first of a sequence of courses including Junior Technology Clinics I and II and Senior Technology Clinics I and
II that will provide a meaningful design experience for a team of undergraduate students under the direction of an
engineering faculty advisor. The project topic will be chosen by mutual agreement of the undergraduate students and their
advisor. The project will include a thorough literature search and review, the development of a clear and concise problem
statement and consultations with other faculty and professional experts. The project will culminate in a final written report
and oral presentation.

END

Junior Technology Clinic II

EGR 02352:

Prerequisites: EGR 02351

This is the second of a sequence of courses including Junior Technology Clinics I and II and Senior Technology Clinics I
and II that will provide a meaningful design experience for a team of undergraduate students under the direction of an
engineering faculty advisor. The project topic will be chosen by mutual agreement of the undergraduate students and their
advisor. The project will include a thorough literature search and review, the development of a clear and concise problem
statement and consultations with other faculty and professional experts. The project will culminate in a final written report
and oral presentation.

END

Senior Technology Clinic I

EGR 02451:

Prerequisites: EGR 02352

This is the third of a sequence of courses including Junior Technology Clinics I and II and Senior Technology Clinics I and
II that will provide a meaningful design experience for a team of undergraduate students under the direction of an
engineering faculty advisor. The project topic will be chosen by mutual agreement of the undergraduate students and their
advisor. The project will include a thorough literature search and review, the development of a clear and concise problem
statement and consultations with other faculty and professional experts. The project will culminate in a final written report
and oral presentation.

END

Senior Technology Clinic II

EGR 02452:

Prerequisites: EGR 02451

This is the fourth of a sequence of courses including Junior Technology Clinics I and II and Senior Technology Clinics I
and II that will provide a meaningful design experience for a team of undergraduate students under the direction of an
engineering faculty advisor. The project topic will be chosen by mutual agreement of the undergraduate students and their
advisor. The project will include a thorough literature search and review, the development of a clear and concise problem
statement and consultations with other faculty and professional experts. The project will culminate in a final written report
and oral presentation.

END

MET 07201:

Applied Thermal Engineering

Prerequisites: CHE 115 AND PHY 210 AND MTH 118

This course introduces students to the science of thermodynamics. It deals primarily with thermodynamic property
relations, energy transfer, and mass, momentum, and energy balance principles. Laboratory experience will include
computer simulation and analysis. Design experience will be integrated throughout the course and culminate in a design
project.

END

Applied Thermal Energy II

MET 07301:

Prerequisites: MET 07201

This course advances student knowledge of thermodynamics, building on the content covered in Applied Thermal Energy
I. It deals primarily with the second law of thermodynamics, internal/external flow, and steady flow devices. Students will be
able to design systems for power production, propulsion, and heating/cooling. Design experience will be integrated
throughout the curriculum and culminate in a design project.

END

Applied Fluid Mechanics

MET 07311:

Prerequisites: MET 07201

This course deals with general flow and with fluid flow in pipe systems. Topics covered in the area of general fluid flow
include hydrostatics, laws of fluid motion, kinematics, dynamics, energy balance, and dimensionless groups. Topics covered
in the area of pipe flow include incompressible flow, compressibility, pumps, viscosity, boundary layers, turbulence, and
losses. The course includes appropriate laboratory experiments and computer applications.

END

Applied Heat Transfer

MET 07312:

Prerequisites: MET 07201

This course describes modes of heat transfer: conduction, convection (forced and natural), and radiation. It presents steady
and unsteady state analysis of heat transfer, types of heat exchangers and heat exchanger design. Demonstrations and
laboratories will by integrated throughout the course.

END

CNC Programming II

MET 07351:

Prerequisites: MET 07251

This course concentrates on three-dimensional Computer Numerical Control (CNC) Programming for machining centers
using commercial, PC based Computer Aided Manufacturing (CAM) software. Major topics include standard 3D surface
types and definitions, post processor theory, planar roughing of 3D surfaces, complex surfaces, and multiple surface
machining.

END

Introduction to Mechanical Systems

MET 07360:

Prerequisites: MET 07201

This course introduces Electrical Engineering Technology students to basic concepts in statics, dynamics and the
thermal/fluid sciences. Special emphasis is placed upon the design and analysis of systems relevant to electrical technicians
including actuators, motors and other electromechanical devices. Heat generation and removal from electronic devices will
also be given significant coverage.

END

Critical Methods I for English Majors

ENGL 02101:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 or COMP 01105 (may be taken concurrently)

Critical Methods I is the first half of the required introductory sequence necessary for upper-level English coursework.
Drawing from the three major literary genres (fiction, poetry, and drama), students will acquire the foundational skills and
knowledge necessary for analyzing and writing critically about literary texts. This course is a pre-req for Critical
Methods II for English Majors (ENGL 02202).

END

ENGL 02110:

This course introduces essential critical methods for the study of literature in relation to major works and authors in the
British literary tradition. This course fulfills the “Humanistic Literacy” requirement of the Rowan Core.

Introduction to British Literature

END

Readings in Asian Literature

ENGL 02112:

This course provides students with some knowledge of and sensitivity to the literary traditions of India, China, and Japan.
The course includes selected ancient, modern, and contemporary works from each of these three Asian cultures. Similarities
and differences among these cultures, as well as between Asian and Western cultures, will be explored. Such works as the
Ramayana, Shakuntala, and the Analects of Confucius, poetry of Li Po, short stories by Lu Hsun, Japanese haiku, Noh plays
and short stories by modern Japanese writers will be included.

END

ENGL 02113:

This course introduces essential critical methods for the study of literature in relation to major works and authors in the
American literary tradition. This course fulfills the “Humanistic Literacy” requirement of the Rowan Core.

Introduction to U.S. Literature

END

Introduction to Global Literatures in English

ENGL 02116:

This course introduces essential critical methods for the study of literature in relation to major works of global literatures
written in English. Though the choice of specific texts will vary depending upon the instructor, this course focuses on works
of literature in English beyond those written in America and the British Isles. It fulfills the “Global Literacy” requirement of
the Rowan Core.

END

Topics in Literature

ENGL 02123:

This course introduces essential critical methods for the study of literature in relation to a special literary topic. Topics
(which may focus on a special theme, literary period, author, or genre) vary widely and will be announced each semester. This
course fulfills the “Humanistic Literacy” requirement of the Rowan Core.

END

Readings in Shakespeare

ENGL 02151:

A general-education course, this class studies six to eight representative plays by Shakespeare, including examples of all
four genres - comedy, tragedy, history, and romance. The course will consider closely character, theme, language, and
theatrical values. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Gender, Sexuality, and Literature

ENGL 02200:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 or COMP 01105 (may be taken concurrently)

This course considers the role literature plays in shaping, reflecting, and revealing cultural perceptions of gender and
sexuality. Through assigned texts, students will explore the ways gender and sexuality have intersected with different
historical periods, literary movements, cultural traditions, and other identity categories, including race and class. This course
may not be offered annually.

END

Critical Methods II for English Majors

ENGL 02202:

Prerequisites: ENGL 02101 and COMP 01112 (may be taken concurrently); Field Restrictions: English majors, minors, LS: H/SS
sequencers in English, and students in the Combined Advanced Degree Program (CADP) in English/MST

Critical Methods II for English Majors is designed to introduce students to various schools of literary theory. Students will
read, discuss, and write analytically, incorporating both primary and secondary sources and demonstrating an understanding
of their own and others’ theoretical frameworks.

END

Young Adult Literature

ENGL 02205:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 or COMP 01105

This course examines a diverse variety of texts written for and marketed to young adults in the late twentieth- and
twenty-first centuries. Students will consider how these works engage with, challenge, and/or represent dominant ideologies
of adolescence, as well as other identity categories such as race, class, gender, sexuality, and disability.

END

Multiethnic Literatures of the United States

ENGL 02218:

This course is designed to give English majors and minors, as well as students in American Studies, Africana Studies, and
Liberal Studies: Humanities and Social Sciences, a foundation in some of the major texts and contexts of the ethnic
American literary canon. Students will analyze fiction, non-fiction, poems, and plays by African American, Asian American,
Native American, and US Latino/a writers to better understand how ethnic American literature contributes to larger
cultural questions regarding race, ethnicity, indigeneity, class, gender, and sexuality in the United States. No prior
coursework in ethnic American literatures or in ethnic studies is required.

END

Selected Topics in Multiethnic Literatures of the US

ENGL 02223:

This course is designed to give English majors and minors--as well as students in American Studies, Africana Studies,
Women and Gender Studies, and Liberal Studies: Humanities and Social Sciences--a foundation in multiethnic literature at
the 200-level. Topics will vary from semester to semester, and might focus on a literary/historical period (the Harlem
Renaissance, Manifest Destiny, or the Civil Rights movement, for instance), a genre (contemporary Native American poetry
or Asian American Graphic Novels), or might be related to a theme or topic (the concept of the border, immigration,
intersectionality, or coming of age in U.S. Latino/a literature). Depending on the topic, students will analyze fiction,
non-fiction, memoirs, poems, and/or plays by either African-American, U.S. Latino/a, Native American, Asian and Pacific
American writers, and/or writers from other ethnic American literary and cultural traditions. Additionally, students might
read topically relevant, level-appropriate theory, such as Critical Race Theory or Feminist Theory. Students will better
understand how these writers and their work contribute to larger socio-political and cultural questions regarding the role/s
of race, ethnicity, indigeneity, religion, class, gender, and sexuality in the literary history of the United States. No prior
coursework in multiethnic American literature is required.

END

Genre Studies: Short Fiction

ENGL 02228:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 or COMP 01105 or HONR 01111

This survey studies representative works of short fiction written in English from several periods and cultures. It focuses on
the conventions of short fiction as a genre of literature.

END

World Mythologies

ENGL 02231:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 or COMP 01105 or HONR 01111 (may be taken concurrently)

This course provides an introduction to a variety of mythologies, which may include Mesopotamian, Egyptian, Indian,
Norse, Irish, Native American, and Greek and Roman mythologies. This course analyzes the narratives, characters, and
themes in those mythologies, as well as their influences on British, American, and global Anglophone literatures.

END

Genre Studies: Drama

ENGL 02234:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 or COMP 01105

The survey studies representative plays written in English from several periods and cultures. It focuses on the conventions
of drama as a genre of literature.

END

Genre Studies: Poetry

ENGL 02235:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 or COMP 01105

This survey covers the conventions, history, and formal development of poetry as a literary genre, requires students to have
a command of poetry's basic elements (such as verse form, rhythm, and meter), and considers a wide range of poems written
in English. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Queer Literature

ENGL 02269:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 or COMP 01105

This course considers the ways literature participates in constructing and representing lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
and queer identities, lives, and experiences. Students will apply the basic concepts of queer theory to a variety of texts in
different literary genres, exploring how these works illuminate our understanding of gender and sexuality-based norms, as
well as the cultural and social history of LGBTQ+ rights.

END

The English Novel

ENGL 02270:

Prerequisites: ENGL 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently)

This upper-level elective offers a historical survey of the English novel as it has developed since its rise in the eighteenth
century. Students in this course will consider a series of representative works in relation to their social and historical
contexts, and in conjunction with narrative theory. This course may not be offered annually.

END

The American Novel

ENGL 02285:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently) or AMST 13301 and ENGL 02313 and
ENGL 02315

This course focuses on a representative selection of U.S. novels. Students will explore the formal and thematic elements of
the genre associated with romance, realism, naturalism, modernism, postmodernism, fantasy, etc. They will investigate the
novelistic techniques used to comment upon recurrent themes in American literature, such as economic opportunity,
individualism, liberty, slavery, immigration and colonialism, the frontier, violence, religion/spirituality, nature, urbanization,
to name just a few. This course will also examine how race, gender, class, and sexual orientation are central to constructions
of a national identity and literary tradition.

END

Literary Study Off-Campus

ENGL 02301:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02202

This course permits students to study literature off-campus and abroad under faculty supervision. Travel and program
costs are borne by the students.

END

Contemporary Children's Literature for Non-Majors

ENGL 02305:

This course will introduce students to the critical evaluation of contemporary texts written for children between the
late-twentieth century and the twenty-first century. Designed for non-English majors, the course explores how picture
books, early readers, poetry, and chapter books represent social categories that include race, class, and gender, in the process
considering the relevance of children’s literature to modern society.

END

British Literature I

ENGL 02309:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This upper-level course surveys key developments in British language and literature from the early medieval period through
the 18th century. Students in this survey will consider a series of representative works in relation to their specific social and
historical contexts.

END

British Literature II

ENGL 02311:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This upper-level course surveys key developments in British language and literature from the late eighteenth century to the
present, examining texts by Romantic, Victorian, modernist, and postcolonial writers. Students in this survey will consider a
series of representative works in relation to their specific social and historical contexts.

END

US Literature I

ENGL 02313:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course surveys American literature from its colonial roots to the age of Romanticism in the mid-nineteenth century.
Students will explore the emergence of a national literary tradition and the debate over a collective American identity. We
will discuss texts that advocate for the ideals of liberty and individualism within a historical context that includes Native
dispossession, a racist slave system, and oppressive gender inequalities.

END

US Literature II

ENGL 02315:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course surveys American literature from the Civil War to the present. Students will engage examples of literary
realism and naturalism in the context of industrial expansion and increased immigration. They will explore the radical
experimentation of modernist writers between World War I and II as well as the explosive range of styles, voices, and ideas
associated with the postmodernism of the late 20th century.

END

ENGL 02317:

Children's Literature: Texts and Contexts

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently)

This course will introduce students to a range of literature written for children from a wide variety of time periods,
cultures, and genres. Students will place literary works in historical and cultural contexts to analyze how changing
constructions of childhood and adulthood shape the texts children read.

END

Literature of the American Renaissance

ENGL 02322:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently) or AMST 13301 and ENGL 02313 and
ENGL 02315

This course focuses on the literature of the American Renaissance (1830-1860). This study of works by writers like Cooper,
Bryant, Irving, Poe, Emerson, Douglass, Thoreau, Hawthorne, Melville, Longfellow, Whitman, Stowe, Jacobs, and
Dickinson will cover the three major characteristics of the period: the movement from classicism to romanticism in the
early writers; the development of literary nationalism, and an increasing interest in exploring what it means to be an
American; and, finally, the beginnings of literary realism with the approach of the Civil War. This course may not be offered
annually.

END

American Realism and Naturalism

ENGL 02324:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently) or AMST 13301 and ENGL 02313 and
ENGL 02315

Students will examine U.S. fiction produced between 1865 and 1914, studying its rejection of popular romanticism and its
advocacy of a representational style concurrent with an increasingly urban, industrial society. This course may not be offered
annually.

END

Modern and Contemporary American Poetry

ENGL 02327:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently) or AMST 13301 and ENGL 02313 and
ENGL 02315

This course will examine a variety of American poets from the beginning of the twentieth century to the present day. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

Classical Literature in Translation

ENGL 02330:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently)

This course covers works by authors such as Homer, Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Plato, Virgil, Horace, and Ovid,
whose ideas provide the foundation for much of Western intellectual history. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Literary Theory

ENGL 02340:

Prerequisites: Comp 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently)

Literary Theory introduces students to key texts from a wide range of theoretical schools. The course looks at the
historical development of theories (from New Criticism to deconstruction, from feminism to gender and queer theories,
etc.) to see how they relate to, respond to, and challenge each other. Students will work to understand key concepts from
each theory, use the theories to interpret literature, and recognize the theoretical assumptions used by other literary
scholars. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Shakespeare I

ENGL 02345:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently) or COMP 01112 and THD 07201 and
THD 07202

This course surveys the major plays of Shakespeare’s career, including representative plays from each of the major
Shakespearean genres (tragedy, comedy, history, romance) with an emphasis on their historical, formal, and theoretical
contexts. Engaging with both traditional and emerging critical approaches, this course examines Shakespeare’s plays with a
special emphasis on performance and adaptation from the early modern era through the twenty-first century.

END

African American Literature I

ENGL 02354:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently) or AMST 13301 and ENGL 02313 and
ENGL 02315 or COMP 01112 and AFST 01104

This upper-level survey course examines African American literature from its beginnings in the colonial period through the
Harlem Renaissance. We will engage in close readings of seminal vernacular, autobiographical, poetic, creative, and critical
tests, exploring the relationship between literary expression and the highly charged American social, cultural, and political
histories that form its context.

END

African American Literature II

ENGL 02355:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently) or AMST 13301 and and ENGL 02313
and ENGL 02315 or COMP 01112 and AFST 11104

This upper-level survey course examines themes and issues commonly found in African American literature published since
the Harlem Renaissance. We will analyze such theories of racial consciousness as invisibility, Black Power, and the Black
Aesthetic, bearing in mind how certain historical, political, social, and cultural factors influenced the literature. While
understanding the complex notions of race will be our focus, we will also consider how (or if) racial identity blends with
other key components of the self such as gender, class, and nationality.

END

Asian American Literature

ENGL 02360:

Prerequisites: (ENGL 02101 AND Corequisites ENGL 02202) OR (AMST 13301 AND ENGL 02313 AND ENGL 02315) OR
(INTR 01136 OR ENGL 02112 OR POSC 07350)

This course is a survey in Asian American literature from the late nineteenth century to the present. We will focus on
major trends, writers, and works, and students will have the opportunity to read selections from a wide range of genres,
including fiction, non-fiction, poetry, and drama. As this course is multiethnic in scope - for instance, featured writers may
draw from US and Chinese, Japanese, Filipino, Indian, Korean, and Vietnamese literary traditions - students will be
encouraged to discover points of commonality among the texts in addition to understanding the ways each literary
contribution is rooted in specific cultural, historical, and political contexts. No prior coursework in Asian American
literature or in ethnic studies is required.

END

Native American Literature

ENGL 02362:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 or COMP 01105 or HONR 01111

This course is designed to introduce students to the major themes and writers of the Native American literary tradition.
Students will read texts within historical contexts that involve threats of dispossession and genocide as well as resistance and
survival. They will learn how diverse Native writers draw upon tribal traditions to advocate self-determination and
sovereignty. Texts will include trickster tales and creation stories; oratory and autobiography; poetry, short fiction, and
novels. No prior coursework in Native American literature or ethnic studies is required.

END

U.S. Latino/a Literature

ENGL 02365:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently) or AMST 13301 and ENGL 02313 and
ENGL 02315 or COMP 01112 and AFST 01104

This course surveys US Latina/o Literature from colonization to the present. Students will explore topics such as
assimilation and the myth of the melting pot, immigration, and geographical and metaphorical borderlands with an eye
toward understanding a number of questions, including: What does it mean to be a “Latina/o” in the United States today?
How does gender, class, race, ethnicity, sexuality, and the language(s) one uses to communicate, impact the representation
of identity in literary texts? Knowledge of Spanish is not required to take this course, nor is having taken prior coursework in
US Latina/o literature or in ethnic studies.

END

African American Literature

ENGL 02380:

Prerequisites: ENGL 02101

This upper-level survey course examines African American literature from its beginnings to the present. We will engage in
close readings of formative vernacular, autobiographical, poetic, creative, and critical texts, exploring the relationship
between literary expression and the highly charged American social, cultural, and political histories that form its context.
The course will cover various genres, including autobiography, poetry, novels, drama, and essays to explore the many ways
African American literature has been a site of reflection on matters of racial identity, gender, sexuality, class, and nationality.

END

Independent Study (English)

ENGL 02392:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202

The course gives students an opportunity to study independently in order to strengthen their background in a particular
area of literary studies.

END

Internship in English

ENGL 02410:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently)

This course provides the opportunity for students majoring in English to apply the skills they have developed in the course
of their studies in a supervised work situation. Students will create a portfolio, keep journals, and meet with the faculty
internship coordinator regularly. This course may be utilized within the 24-hour free elective distribution only.

END

Special Topics in Literature

ENGL 02417:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently)

This course focuses on significant literary works, themes, periods, writers, or genres not regularly covered in the
upper-level electives. Repeatable when topics vary. This course may not be offered annually.

END

The American Novel

ENGL 02423:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently) or AMST 13301 and ENGL 02313 and
ENGL 02315

This course focuses on a representative selection of U.S. novels. Students will explore the formal and thematic elements of
the genre associated with romance, realism, naturalism, modernism, postmodernism, fantasy, etc. They will investigate the
novelistic techniques used to comment upon recurrent themes in American literature, such as economic opportunity,
individualism, liberty, slavery, immigration and colonialism, the frontier, violence, religion/spirituality, nature, urbanization,
to name just a few. This course will also examine how race, gender, class, and sexual orientation are central to constructions
of a national identity and literary tradition.

END

American Drama

ENGL 02424:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently) or COMP 01112 and THD 07201 and
THD 07202 or AMST 13301 and ENGL 02313 and ENGL 02315

This course focuses on canonical and non-canonical American plays from the 20th and 21st centuries. Students will
examine the formal elements of American drama, developing their understanding of how directorial choices impact
thematic meanings when a script is translated from the page to the stage. The plays themselves will cover a wide range of
topics, including family and home, love and death, race and opportunity, gender and cultural expectations, violence and
history, nation and the individual, and more.

END

Contemporary Literature

ENGL 02425:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently)

This upper-level elective focuses on recent developments in contemporary literature. Students in this course will consider a
series of representative works in relation to their social and historical contexts and in conjunction with literary theory. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

Anglo-Saxon and Medieval Literature

ENGL 02430:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently)

This course studies the foundations of English language and literature from its beginnings through the fifteenth century,
proceeding from the relatively limited selection of Anglo-Saxon poetry and prose to the profusion of literary genres extant in
the Middle Ages. Although almost all texts will be read in translation, some attention will be devoted to understanding the
major characteristics of the Anglo-Saxon language and Middle English. Selections from continental writers of the period
may also be included. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Chaucer

ENGL 02440:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently)

This course studies the poetry of Chaucer, the language that he used, and to the times in which he lived. This course may
not be offered annually.

END

English Renaissance Literature

ENGL 02441:

Prerequisites: ((COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201 or ENGL 01112) and ENGL 02010)) or ENGL 02202 (may be taken
concurrently)

This course features a wide variety of authors and genres from the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, considered
within the rich context of early modern ideas and discoveries. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Shakespeare II

ENGL 02445:

Prerequisites: (COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02345 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently) or COMP 01112
and THD 07201 and THD 07202 and ENGL 02345

This course is an in-depth exploration of the dramatic and non-dramatic works of Shakespeare. Building on the foundation
of Shakespeare I, this course focuses on new and emerging critical approaches to the Shakespearean canon, and examines his
works in the social, cultural, religious, and political contexts of early modern Europe.

END

British Literature: The Long Eighteenth Century

ENGL 02460:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently)

This course, intended for English majors and minors, studies poetry, non-fiction prose, and drama from the Restoration to
Romanticism. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Special Topics in Multiethnic Literatures of the United States

ENGL 02470:

Prerequisites: ENGL 02101 or ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently) or (AMST 13301 and ENGL 02313 and ENGL 02315) or
((COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201 or ENGL 01112)and AFST 01104))

This course is designed to give students an opportunity to study in-depth, at an advanced level, key texts and contexts of
ethnic American literary canons. The “special topic” of individual courses, which will vary each semester, may be thematic or
generic in scope, and may draw from African American, Asian and Pacific American, Latino/a, Native American, and other
ethnic American literary and cultural traditions.

END

English Romanticism

ENGL 02471:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202(may be taken concurrently)

This course studies the major works of the turbulent English Romantic period, with particular attention to developments
in poetry and narrative. It may not be offered annually.

END

Victorian Literature

ENGL 02472:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently)

This course focuses on major works of English poetry, fiction, and nonfiction narrative of the Victorian period in Britain
(roughly 1830 to 1900). It may not be offered annually.

END

Global Modernisms

ENGL 02473:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently)

This course focuses on major works of twentieth-century British and Irish literature, with particular attention to its social
and historical contexts. It may not be offered annually.

END

Special Topics in Global Literatures in English

ENGL 02475:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently) or COMP 01112 and AFST 01104

English is a global language: it is used for business and diplomacy as well as to write poetry, novels, and plays throughout the
world. In this course we will read works of literature written in English that represent diverse perspectives and literary
traditions. Students will gain an in-depth understanding of literary cultures outside of North America and Europe and the
way they intersect with colonial history, globalization, and the dynamics of cultural exchange. The changing topic and texts
will be chosen by faculty and may cover the literature of Africa, Asia, Latin America, and/or the Caribbean. This course may
not be offered annually.

END

Modern European Literature

ENGL 02482:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02101 and ENGL 02202 (may be taken concurrently)

This course considers continental literary movements of the twentieth century, from realism to existentialism. It may not
be offered annually.

END

Senior Seminar - WI

ENGL 02499:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and ENGL 02202 and 18 credits within the major

This writing-intensive capstone course is required of all English majors in their senior year. In this course, students will
have the opportunity to demonstrate and apply the cumulative skills and knowledge they have accrued in the field of literary
studies. Each seminar, capped at no more than 15 students, will engage in intensive study of a particular topic in the
professor’s area of scholarly expertise. The course emphasizes individual guidance, class discussion, sophisticated research
techniques, and the writing of a major analytical paper that represents a significant contribution to the critical conversation
on the seminar’s topic.

END

ENGL 05301:

This course emphasizes traditional grammar and seeks to give students a practical understanding of the structure of
contemporary American English grammar.

American English Grammar

END

Experiential Learning in the Humanities and Social Sciences

INTR 20395:

This course will enable students to receive 0- to 1-credits for a minimum of 40 hours in experiences such as faculty-led
study abroad, job shadowing, service-learning, and student-faculty research. Through goal-setting and reflection, students
will make use of their discipline-based knowledge and skills in their out-of-classroom experience. Students must secure their
experience independently, and submit an online application to the College of Humanities and Social Sciences Center for
Professional Success to be entered into this course. This course will satisfy the Experiential Learning requirement of the
College of Humanities and Social Sciences. Course requirements will include a Statement of Intent with three goals for the
experience; a Midterm Progress Report, and a Final Reflective Essay. Hours must be logged and signed off on by supervisor.
This course will be graded P/NC.

END

Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Entrepreneurship

ENT 06110:

This course provides students with an introduction to entrepreneurship. Students explore topics such as entrepreneurial
mindset, business model innovation, social entrepreneurship, global problems and innovative solutions. Students walk away
equipped to discuss and present business model fundamentals, ideate solutions, creatively solve problems, and develop basic
prototypes.

END

Entrepreneurship and Innovation

ENT 06240:

Restriction: Freshman Classification Excluded
This course provides a broad framework for understanding the nature of entrepreneurship and the mindset of
entrepreneurs. The course introduces students to the innovation and idea generation process and helps students determine
the most desirable educational path for them to achieve their career goals.

END

SCALING NEW VENTURES

ENT 06312:

This course provides the student with insights into the development and growth of seed and early stage startup
organizations. Active participation in the Rohrer New Venture Competition (NVC) and the Global Scaling Challenge
(GSC) will be the primary basis of the learning process. Students will serve as consultants for clients that are New Venture
organizations that have voluntarily elected to participate in the Rowan annual New Venture Competition and the Global
Scaling Challenge.

END

Entrepreneurship Mentorship Program

ENT 06325:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

This course is the academic foundation for the Entrepreneurship Mentorship Program. Students accepted into this
program complete this course as the academic part of the program. The course focuses on cultivating entrepreneurial
skillsets and mindsets through mentorship. Skills such as finding mentors, being mentored, networking, and learning how to
successfully enter an industry are all focal. A working framework for rules of successful entrepreneurship is also covered and
serves as the lens by which the course is taught. In. this curse the role of the faculty member is one of a coach, not a teacher,
so the course dynamic is different than a traditional topical entrepreneurship course. Students participate in experiential
learning opportunities each semester in the program.

END

Entrepreneurship and Small Business Management

ENT 06326:

Prerequisites: Junior standing, 57 credits required

This course provides complete coverage of entrepreneurial models of organization and decision making. Topics include
making the decision to go into business, what to expect, and the areas of small business operations (finance, purchasing,
production, and sales) and management (planning, organizing, directing, and controlling). Students will develop an
entrepreneurial profile of an existing entrepreneur or do a preliminary feasibility analysis for a complete business plan for a
business of their choice. This course will acquaint students with the opportunities and perils of starting and managing their
own firms.

END

Small and Family Business Venturing

ENT 06327:

Prerequisites: Junior standing, 57 credits required

This course focuses on small and family ventures. A special focus is placed on understanding the systems on which these
ventures are run as well as how these organizations can be built to scale. Through the college's Project Based Learning
Initiative, students will work with live small businesses and/or family firms to help them either position their venture for
growth or succession.

END

Evaluating Franchising Opportunities

ENT 06328:

Prerequisites: Junior standing, 57 credits required

This course is designed for students who are interested in learning about the opportunities and threats that abound in the
modern world of franchising. Franchising is pervasive in our economy. The practice spans virtually every retail and wholesale
product category. The logic of this course is that franchising is one of the development models that minimize risk for the
¿small business¿ focused student. Many of these opportunities offer the chance for high incomes if the model is developed
fully. Some franchising oriented people may want to start a franchise and grow it rapidly. This option is often a first step into
business ownership for inexperienced owners.

END

ENT 06333:

This course will allow students studying Entrepreneurship the opportunity to investigate specific topic areas within this
discipline. The course will be made up of lectures, class discussions, and a variety of assignments involving entrepreneurship.

Special Topics in Entrepreneurship

END

ENT 06342:

Financing and Legal Aspects of Entrepreneurship

Prerequisites: Junior standing (completion of 57 credit hours) and ENT 06240 or permission of instructor.

This course provides an overview of the legal and financing issues most frequently encountered by entrepreneurs and
others involved by both new and growth oriented ventures. The course covers various aspects of financing an
entrepreneurial venture, (venture capital, angel investors, banking, etc.), as well as various legal aspects, (entity selection,
employment law, intellectual property, valuation, etc.).

END

Global Entrepreneurship Growth Strategies

ENT 06344:

Prerequisites: Junior standing (completion of 57 credit hours) and ENT 06240 or permission of instructor.

Through a global lens this course challenges students to develop a growth mindset. Students will learn how ventures, small
and large, are capitalizing by expanding to service the global economy. Through a combination of cases, guest speakers,
learning journeys, and multimedia tools, students will gain a firsthand look at entrepreneurship in the global environment.

END

Social Entrepreneurship

ENT 06346:

Prerequisites: Junior standing, 57 credits required

The Social Entrepreneurship course provides a broad theoretical perspective and practical framework for understanding
social entrepreneurs and the social ventures they create ranging from local social organizations to large international social
ventures leading global change. The course introduces students to the possibilities of social entrepreneurship and an
introduction to the entire social venture creation process and life cycle.

END

Real Estate Entrepreneurship

ENT 06347:

This course explores the entrepreneurial side of real estate. The course tracks the life cycle of real estate ventures and
investments, looking at all aspects of the deal process, from sourcing and raising capital to property management and
disposition. A special focus is placed on real-world deal making skills through the lens of an entrepreneur operating in this
industry with disparate resources and an uncertain environment. Success in the real estate requires personal relationships,
hard earned experience, and business savvy. New challenges emerge daily, setbacks happen, and these experiences shape the
real estate entrepreneur in different ways. This course aims to help jump-start the process by focusing on deal-making and
the lifecycle and stages of real estate venturing. Students will learn to understand real estate business model complexities and
industry dynamics.

END

Foundations of Real Estate

ENT 06348:

This course covers the core foundational elements necessary for success in the business of real estate. Students will learn
how to map the real estate industry, gain an understanding of core legal and financial aspects of real estate, and gain literacy
in common local and state zoning and policy considerations.

END

Real Estate Licensure Exam Prep

ENT 06349:

This course will prepare students for the state examination to become a licensed New Jersey Real Estate salesperson. The
curriculum covers property interests and rights, mortgages, leases, business opportunity sales, municipal and state laws and
regulations, the law of agency and the licensing act, and rules and regulations. All content is complaint with the New Jersey
Real Estate Commission requirements for licensure.

END

ENT 06351:

Entrepreneurship In The Cannabis Industry

Prerequisites: Admission into the Cannabis Commercialization CUGS or Permission of Instructor.

This industry analysis course forces students to develop a deep understanding of the cannabis industry, its history,
competitive dynamics, opportunities for innovation, and the current business landscape. A historical overview will address
the origins of cannabis, 19th century legal uses, early prohibition, counterculture, the war on drugs, state medical
legalization, new approaches to adult use, and current and potential future federal laws. An overview of the cannabis plant
will review hemp vs. marijuana as well as products, ingestion methods, and the Endocannabinoid system. An overview of
laws and regulations will include federal vs. state vs. local, complexities in the system, provisions relating to medical vs. adult
use (recreational). Social equity will be focused on from perspectives including the lasting effects of the war on drugs,
reinvesting in communities disproportionately impacted, racial and social justice. Key points on cultivation will be reviewed
such as plant science, facilities, financials, and regulatory compliance. Definitions and examples of business types in
categories of plant-touching vs. ancillary will be addressed. Drivers of demand will be examined such as medical and adult
(recreational) use, health and wellness, current and projected demographics, and genetics of plant strains. Analysis of the
economics of cannabis will be analyzed including markets across the industry, potential economic impact, public policy
implications, and financial barriers to entry. Considerations for retail in cannabis will include products, in-store experiences,
in person retail and tech-based platforms for ordering and delivery, and social consumption via lounges, concerts, and other
public venues.

END

Business Models in Cannabis

ENT 06352:

Prerequisites: ENT 06351

Students in this course will explore business model innovations that are applicable across industries, and will also delve into
concepts and constructs that are unique to the highly regulated and rapidly evolving cannabis industry. In exploring
contemporary business models and corporate structure students will learn about common patterns and how to
systematically understand, design, and implement a game-changing business model--or analyze and renovate an old one. Key
elements for business model innovation across all industries to be analyzed include customer segments, value propositions,
channels, customer relationships, revenue streams, key resources, key activities, key partners, and cost structure. Student
will learn how to identify, create, and deliver value for existing and future customers, as well as extract value for a corporate
venture in a sustainable manner. Fundamentals of new venture financing will be considered, such as capital structures for
new ventures (e.g. debt vs. equity), term sheets and how to negotiate them, early-stage vs. later-stage financing.
Cannabis-specific business model implications will be explored in depth as well. This include trademarks and IP, marketing
and branding, multi-state operators (MSOs) vs. standalone businesses, challenges and benefits of vertical integration, costs
for licensing and compliance, and rules and regulations regarding plant-touching vs. ancillary business. Students will also
learn about the most challenging financial hurdles for plant-touching cannabis entrepreneurs and operators: banking (given
that most national institutions are not willing to support due to federal illegality) and IRS 280E Tax Code (no deductions or
credits are allowed due to federally controlled substance).

END

Supervised Internship in Entrepreneurship

ENT 06361:

This course prepares students to become entrepreneurs through internships in which they engage in entrepreneurial
activities under the supervision of business, industry, or non-profit managers or entrepreneurs. Interns are given
assignments that prepare them for productive employment upon graduation. The learning process is monitored by the
College of Business faculty members.

END

Entrepreneurship Capstone

ENT 06415:

Prerequisites: Entrepreneurship major or minor Senior standing, and ENT 06426 New Venture Development OR permission of
instructor

This capstone course for entrepreneurship majors and minors is run using a live field consulting model where students
work toward the launch of a new venture, scaling of an existing venture, or entrance into a new industry. Students will be
interact with multiple serial entrepreneurs and receive faculty mentorship advance their projects forward. The course is
highly individualized, hands on and experiential. Students should expect to be pushed outside of comfort zones and
challenged to be bold.

END

New Venture Development

ENT 06426:

Prerequisites: Junior standing (completion of 57 credit hours) and ENT 06240, or permission of instructor.

This course focuses on the business model components that drive new ventures. Students participate in in-depth customer
discovery, market and industry research, and financial modeling, all of which then aggregate into a more formal business plan
or dossier.

END

Technology Entrepreneurship

ENT 06450:

Prerequisites: Junior standing, 57 credits required

This course provides the student with a strong foundation of what it takes to launch a technology based venture, (software
programming, IoT, biomedical, autonomous vehicles, etc.). Topics include technology evaluation, prototyping, customer
discovery, funding mechanisms, and intellectual property protection.

END

Entrepreneurship And Innovation

ENT 06505:

Prerequisites (effective Spring 2009): ACC 03500 andMGT 06502 and MKT 09500

This course provides a broad framework for understanding the nature of entrepreneurship in multiple organizational
settings. The course introduces students to the innovation and idea generation process and helps students apply an
alternative way of "thinking" to assist in solving difficult issues for government, business, and the non-profit sector.

END

ENT 06599:

Students will study advanced level topics in Entrepreneurship. The exact topics will change over time to remain relevant as
practices in industry and markets evolve. Contact the MBA office for additional details.

Special Topics In Entrepreneurship

END

Planet in Peril: Environmental Science in the 21st Century

EVSC 01101:

In this multidisciplinary course students will examine basic scientific principles underlying environmental problems such
as climate change, sea level rise, biodiversity loss, and environmental pollution among many others. Reasons for these
problems, as well as possible solutions will be explored. Environmental concerns in New Jersey and the mid-Atlantic region
will be highlighted but national and global examples will also feature prominently. In addition, students in this course will
learn some of the basic skills necessary for scientific inquiry, including the scientific method, critical thinking, and
evaluating data to draw valid scientific conclusions.

END

The Environmental Experience

EVSC 01110:

In this gateway field course, students will gain an appreciation for and learn about the local environment through field
experiences. As an outdoor laboratory course, students will be exposed to the physical and living environmental systems of
southern NJ, including pine barrens, temperate forest, and coastal and aquatic systems. The course is conducted over 7
weeks in 5 hours session; attendance is mandatory. It is open only to Environmental Science majors.

END

Environment in the Headlines

EVSC 01115:

Everyday we read alarming headlines about environmental threats. In this course, students will focus on a few of the
environmental issues making the news. Students will delve into the science behind the issues, and investigate possible
solutions to the issues. They will also explore how issues are presented, and learn to separate scientific fact from fantasy.

END

Oceans in Crisis

EVSC 01120:

Oceans cover two thirds of Earth’s surface, and are inextricably linked with modern human civilization. Yet human
activities are rapidly changing our oceans at a global scale in ways that make it more difficult for people to use them.
Students in this course will gain an overview of the many human-caused environmental problems that face Earth’s oceans
including but not limited to warming, acidification, over-fertilization, pollution, drilling and mining, and overfishing. To
place these problems in context, students will also gain a basic understanding of how oceans function.

END

Global Environmental Change

EVSC 01121:

Humans are the most significant agents of environmental change on the Earth and our activities have impacted the Earth’s
ecosystems in many ways. In this introductory-level science course, students will learn how human demand for resources
such as space, clean air and water, productive farmland, energy, and raw materials have altered the health of ecosystems and
their ability to positively influence humans and other organisms. A unifying theme of the course is ecosystem services and
the degree to which healthy intact ecosystems are able to provide these services to human societies. In addition, students in
this course will learn some of the basic skills necessary for scientific inquiry, including the scientific method, critical
thinking, and evaluating data to draw valid scientific conclusions.

END

Future of Food

EVSC 01122:

21st century agricultural has moved far from the earliest forms of cultivation. This introductory level science course
explores the challenges of modern agriculture, including production, delivery, sustainability, nutrition, and resilience to
changing climate. Students will explore the natural systems involved in agriculture (soil, water, climate, crops, pests) and
their relationship to food production. The course will focus on applied learning, including the application of real data to gain
practice problem solving, and critical thinking. A semester long research project on an assigned region allows students to
apply what they have learned in the semester.

END

Environmental Science Research Methods and Data Analysis

EVSC 01202:

Prerequisites: STAT 02260

In this course students will build upon basic statistical concepts introduced in Statistics I with applications to the
environmental disciplines. Emphasis is placed on developing valid sampling approaches, hypothesis testing, experimental
design, and analysis of environmental data. A variety of parametric and non-parametric statistical approaches will be
covered. Methods used to collect environmental data from the field will be introduced. Computer software will be used
regularly to manipulate and analyze data and present results.

END

Foraging for Edible Plants

EVSC 01210:

In this course, students will explore the historical and contemporary reasons why humans forage for edible plants. There
will be discussions about modern diets in a global agricultural world, and common pervasive myths about the dangers of
foraging for wild plants. Students will learn how to identify species of edible plants, and recognize inedible/poisonous plants
of the Eastern United States, with a heavy emphasis on plant species of the Mid-Atlantic (NJ/DE/PA) area. Students will
learn in both classroom and field settings, with a strong emphasis on field recognition of edible plants, and how to forage
safely and sustainably. Students will become familiar with ethical foraging methods. This course is suitable for all majors.

END

EVSC 01220:

Global Climate Crisis

Prerequisites: STAT 02260 OR STAT 02280

Anthropogenic climate change has created an unparalleled environmental crisis for our planet. Scientific evidence tells a
sobering story of the ways in which climate change impacts are already being felt around the globe, and provides dire
warnings about the ways in which our planet and modern civilization will be affected under future climate change in the
absence of significant action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The current climate crisis is a multi-faceted problem, with
no easy solutions—but the students of today are the problem solvers of tomorrow. Students in this course will 1) gain an
understanding of the science behind climate change 2) discover the impacts of climate change, while learning about possible
adaptation and mitigation strategies, and 3) develop the skills needed to further discussion of this important issue and
possible ways to address it.

END

Global Field Study

EVSC 01225:

This course combines classroom-based and field-based instruction to introduce students to environments beyond campus.
This intensive but unique learning experience helps students make the connection between lecture and environmental
practice in a range of ecosystems and physical environments.

END

Special Topics in Environmental Science

EVSC 01290:

Prerequisites: EVSC 01115

This course provides extended study on selected topics in Environmental Science. pre-reqs are determined by the
nature of the topic.

END

EVSC 01305:

Contaminants in the Environment

Prerequisites: EVSC 01202 CHEM 06101 and STAT 02260

In this course students will gain familiarity with contaminant sources, their fate in the environment, transport through
air/water/soil, and impact on humans and ecosystems. The physical and chemical properties of contaminants will be applied
to explain their environmental behavior. Risk assessment and remediation examples will be used to demonstrate solutions to
difficult environmental problems. Past environmental contaminant challenges, how these issues were resolved, and the
emergence of new contaminants posing a threat to human and environmental health will be discussed. Labs will include
benchwork, fieldwork, and data science applications to teach students important skills in sample/data collection, sample
analysis, and data analysis. This course is suitable for science and engineering majors.

END

Internship Experience in Environmental Science

EVSC 01310:

Prerequisites: All students must have identified and been accepted into an appropriate internship opportunity prior to registering for the
course.

An internship provides career-related work experience that an individual takes on responsible roles outside of the
traditional university environment such as in a non-profit organization, a government office, or a for-profit business. This
course provides students an opportunity to obtain an internship experience in environmental science which is carried out
under qualified supervision at a host institution and overseen by a Rowan Environmental Science faculty member. By
successful completion of the internship, students will develop professional skills, gain hands-on experience, evaluate career
opportunities, and begin to build a professional network. Through documenting methods and their contribution to mitigate
an environmental issue in the format of a scientific paper and presenting it to the department, students will improve their
science literacy and communication skills. Overall, this course develops students’ skills and experience on how to integrate
their knowledge and skills to solve big-picture environmental issues in a broader context.

END

Scientific Computing and Analytics in Environmental Science

EVSC 01330:

Prerequisites: EVSC 01202

Scientific computing is an essential skill for a wide variety of scientific disciplines, including many areas of Environmental
Science. In this class, students will acquire the expertise needed for efficient scientific computing in the context of
environmental science. These skills will include the basic “ETL--Extract, Transform, and Load” abilities highly sought after
by today’s data-driven businesses and industries. Students will learn how to extract the necessary data for use in solving a
problem, transform that data by performing statistical analyses on it, and load that data into other formats such as figures or
databases. This course will focus on developing these skills while placing particular emphasis on techniques and tools most
frequently needed within the environmental sciences. Due to the nature of this course and the subject material, students will
need to have access to a laptop that is not a Chromebook that they can bring with them to lectures to complete course work.

END

Field Methods in Environmental Science

EVSC 01350:

Prerequisites: EVSC/ENST 01202 and EVSC 01110

Students will learn strategies for applying the scientific method in field-based environmental science and gain technical
skills in environmental sample and data collection and sample analysis using a wide range of field and laboratory methods.
The course is structured around a semester-long project to investigate the impact of human activities on natural systems
using Chestnut Branch Creek and the surrounding Rowan University campus as the primary field site. Methods for data
collection will include handheld sensors like DO/pH/salinity probes as well as data loggers that continuously record
parameters like stream water level and temperature. Students will also collect soil and water samples for laboratory-based
analysis of water quality parameters such as nutrient and dissolved gas concentrations. Through this writing intensive (WI)
course, students will author job-relevant documents like a research proposal, a quality assurance project plan (QAPP), and an
EPA-style technical report that all document the semester project.

END

Soil Science and Global Soil Resources

EVSC 01379:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06101; GEOL 01101 is recommended

Soils are the foundation of terrestrial life and the interface between human activity, food production, and Earth system
processes. In this course students will learn about the physical, chemical, and biological characteristics of soil, including soil
classification and distribution. Through the exploration of soil as a global resource that provides many vital ecosystem
services, students will learn how soils function in terms of plant growth, nutrient sources and sinks, the global carbon cycle
and other biogeochemical cycles, ecology, and water purification. This course is suitable for science and engineering majors.

END

Principles of Atmospheric and Climate Science

EVSC 01380:

Prerequisites: (PHYS 00210 OR PHYS 00220) AND CHEM 06100 AND STAT 02260

Students are introduced to the composition and structure of the atmosphere, clouds and weather, thermodynamic
processes, solar and terrestrial radiation, and motion. The physical processes controlling climate of the atmosphere and
surface are emphasized, along with the factors affecting climate change.

END

Sea-Level Change: Past, Present, and Future

EVSC 01381:

Prerequisite: EVSC 01220 or GEOL 01131

Throughout Earth’s history, sea-levels have continually changed. Today and into the future, we expect sea-levels to
continue to change due to the warming of our planet caused by anthropogenic climate change, leading to potential
catastrophic effects for coastal communities around the world. It is thus more important than ever that we have accurate
scientific projections of future sea-level change. In this course, students will 1) gain an understanding of the mechanisms
driving the complex spatio-temporal evolution of sea-level change from the geological era to the instrumental era, and into
the future 2) learn about methodologies used to construct past sea-level change and project future sea-level rise and 3)
acquire the skills needed to discuss sea-level rise challenges and solutions with a broad range of audiences.

END

Understanding and Analyzing Climate Change Impacts

EVSC 01382:

Prerequisites: (STAT 02260 or STAT 02280) and MATH 01130 and (EVSC 01220 or GEOL 01131) and EVSC 01380

As human-produced greenhouse gas emissions have grown during the anthropogenic era, the temperature of our planet has
increased, and the impacts of a changing climate have escalated. These impacts, ranging from wild fires to sea-level rise, and
from harmful algal blooms to more extreme storms, are already being felt around the world today, and stand to become more
severe without reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Given the potential for such events to alter the world as we know it,
we must strive to understand the connection between these events and a changing climate. Students in this course will 1)
discuss and fully understand the wide variety of climate impacts that affect our world today 2) gain an appreciation for the
challenges associated with projecting the impacts of climate change in the future and 3) develop essential scientific
programming and statistical analysis tools to analyze and assess climate impacts over time.

END

Oceans

EVSC 01385:

Prerequisites: (PHYS 00210 or PHYS 00220) AND CHEM 06101

This course introduces students to fundamental aspects of ocean science. Students will gain an understanding of the
structure and function of oceans within the broader Earth system, and the physical, chemical, geological, and biological
processes that contribute to ocean function. Students will also learn about the process of ocean science and human impacts
on marine systems.

END

Estuaries

EVSC 01386:

Prerequisites: (PHYS 00210 or PHYS 00220) AND CHEM 06101 AND GEOL 01101 AND BIOL 01204

Estuaries sit at the interface between land and sea and are zones of mixing between rivers and seawater. This course
introduces students to estuarine science. Students will gain an understanding of the physical structure of estuaries, the
physical processes that govern water mixing and exchange, and the chemical and biological processes that control the
composition and productivity of estuarine waters. Students will also gain an appreciation for the complex interaction
between human and natural processes within and around estuaries. This course includes a field trip to the New Jersey coast.

END

Environmental Science Clinic

EVSC 01410:

Prerequisites: EVSC 01305

Environmental Science Clinic offers a project-based approach. Students apply knowledge gained through their previous
coursework to solve a particular research problem. Students have the opportunity to work in class individually or in teams.
Students may also work outside of the classroom in internship experiences.

END

Independent Research in Environmental Science

EVSC 01411:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

Students will identify an Environmental Science faculty member to supervise an independent research project. Students
will spend roughly the equivalent amount of time working on a research project as required for a typical 3-credit course.
Student may take Research in Environmental Science up to 3 times. Only two may count for upper level electives.

END

Research Capstone in Environmental Science

EVSC 01412:

Prerequisites: EVSC 01411

In this course, students will follow up on their previous independent research project to interpret their results and present
their findings in written form. Students will meet regularly with their faculty mentor to set goals, evaluate progress, and
receive feedback. In the process, students will learn best practices in scientific writing specific to the field of Environmental
Science. Students are expected to write a manuscript-style undergraduate thesis over the course of the semester.

END

Environmental Science Senior Seminar

EVSC 01420:

Prerequisites: EVSC 01305

As a capstone experience, the Senior Seminar is intended to be an intensive treatment of a particular topic. Assignments
include reading of peer-reviewed literature and books, literature review, presentations of the literature, development of
white papers, and research day presentations.

END

The Shaping of Earth Systems

EVSC 01425:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06101

This course provides an introduction and investigation of Earth's environmental systems using geological, biological,
oceanographic, and atmospheric concepts. Major feedbacks between the geosphere and biosphere will be a core theme to
understand climatic processes and biogeochemical cycles on geological timescales. Particular emphasis will be placed on the
evolution of organisms and cycling of elements. Global datasets will be introduced as tools for investigating present day
changes to Earth's biogeochemical and climate systems. This course is suitable for science and engineering majors.

END

Radioactivity in the Environment

EVSC 01430:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06101

Radioactivity (both natural and human-sourced) provides powerful insights into creation of the earth, atmosphere, and
oceans, and into the processes that control the cycling of elements within the environment. This course will cover the basics
of isotope geochemistry, with a focus on the properties that make isotopes useful tools in environmental science. Students
will learn how isotopes can be used to answer various environmental questions, such as: How old is the Earth? How old is a
fossil? How quickly do elements move through the atmosphere and ocean? This course will also include an overview of
nuclear energy and anthropogenic releases of radioactivity, with a focus on how anthropogenic inputs have been used to
improve our understanding of the environment.

END

Aquatic Biogeochemistry

EVSC 01435:

Prerequisites: MATH 01131, BIOL 01204, and CHEM 06101

In the iconic words of Gill from Pixar’s Finding Nemo, “all drains lead to the ocean”. But first that wastewater flows
through a diverse array of aquatic environments such as ponds, lakes, streams, rivers, wetlands, and estuaries. What happens
to it along the way? How does its chemistry change and how does this influence the plants and animals that live there?
Aquatic biogeochemistry, the study of the chemical, biological, and physical processes that control the composition of the
aquatic environment, seeks to answer these questions. In this class, you will examine the cycling of elements like oxygen,
carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus that are important to all living things and learn about the microbial processes that drive
these cycles. Through in-class discussions, activities, and demonstrations and independent assignments, you will gain an
understanding of how biogeochemical processes vary between aquatic environments.

END

Advanced Special Topics in Environmental Science

EVSC 01490:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06101

This course provides extended study on selected topics in Environmental Science. pre-reqs are determined by the
nature of the topic.

END

Applied Product Development

ENGR 01395:

Prerequisites: (ENGR 01303 or ENGR 01403 Concurrently) and Instructor Permission

The Rowan College of Engineering Product Development Center (PDEC) is designed to support internal research and the
external product development efforts of Rowan University stakeholders. For those students participating in Junior/Senior
Engineering Clinic with the PDEC or other projects related to product development, this course supplements those clinic
experiences by implementing previously learned skills in product development and providing further insights in ancillary
business and engineering skills required to commercialize a product in a real-world context. Course should be taken in
conjunction with Junior or Senior Engineering Clinic, and may be taken up to 2 times for credit.

END

New Product Development

ENGR 01496:

This course introduces engineering students to the process of new product development and the skills necessary to manage
the various activities required to produce a product from concept to commercialization. Topics include product
development strategies, product development platforms, and project management techniques.

END

Engineering Entrepreneurship Clinic Consultant

XEED 12400:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01303 AND ENT 06240 AND ACC 03210 AND MKT 09200

This course provides a formative experience for Engineering Entrepreneurship students to apply their technical and
business knowledge, skills, and abilities (KSAs) to real-world, meaningful consulting experiences. The course will include the
development of a clear and concise need/value statement for both the student and the client; problem statement
identification/clarification; problem/solution research; the application of KSAs to real-world problems; consultations with
the client, professional experts, and other students/faculty; and the delivery of a final written artifact and oral presentation
to both the client and other course participants.

END

Planet in Peril: Environmental Science in the 21st Century

ENST 94101:

In this multidisciplinary course students will examine basic scientific principles underlying environmental problems such
as climate change, sea level rise, biodiversity loss, and environmental pollution among many others. Reasons for these
problems, as well as possible solutions will be explored. Environmental concerns in New Jersey and the mid-Atlantic region
will be highlighted but national and global examples will also feature prominently. In addition, students in this course will
learn some of the basic skills necessary for scientific inquiry, including the scientific method, critical thinking, and
evaluating data to draw valid scientific conclusions.

END

Human Nature: Intro to Environmental & Sustainability Studies

ENST 94102:

This course examines relationships between human society and the natural environments that sustain our lives. Embracing
an interdisciplinary perspective, this course offers students a foundation in the exciting field of environmental and
sustainability studies.

END

Sustainability Assessment

ENST 94201:

Prerequisites: STAT 02260 and ENST 94101 and ENST 94102

“Sustainability” is a popular term these days. But, where does it come from, and how do we know if we have achieved it? In
this course, we examine the origins and historical development of the sustainability concept. We also introduce approaches
for setting sustainability goals, measuring progress towards sustainability outcomes, and managing so-called “sustainability
transitions”. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Environmental Science Research Methods and Data Analysis

ENST 94202:

Prerequisites: ENST 94101 and STAT 02260

In this course students will build upon basic statistical concepts introduced in Statistics I with applications to the
environmental disciplines. Emphasis is placed on developing valid sampling approaches, hypothesis testing, experimental
design, and analysis of environmental data. A variety of parametric and non-parametric statistical approaches will be
covered. Methods used to collect environmental data from the field will be introduced. Computer software will be used
regularly to manipulate and analyze data and present results.

END

Environmental Ethics

ENST 94301:

This is a multidisciplinary course that addresses ethical issues and concerns regarding the environment; the relationships
between individual, society and the natural environment; the importance of common attitudes and prevailing world-views
for understanding and responding to environmental challenges; and the need for changes in those attitudes and world-views.
Students will be encouraged to think about the profound ethical, political, economic, religious, scientific, and technological
implications of these environmental challenges.

END

Technology and the Environment

ENST 94302:

Prerequisites: ENST 94102

This course examines the relationships between technology and both natural and human environments. We will consider
multiple spatial and temporal scales ranging from huge infrastructure projects like dams and the sweeping environmental
impacts they introduce to the frontiers of genetic modification, working on individual cells. The format of the course
emphasizes discussion, active learning, multimedia analysis, critical & analytical writing, and conducting a research
investigation into a topic of your choice related to the class. Students will develop fluency in the critical assessment of
technologies, the policies and practices creating them, and the impacts they make on the human environment relationship.

END

Environmental Advocacy

ENST 94303:

Prerequisites: ENST 94102 or permission of the instructor

In this course, we explore different ways of “doing something about the environment,” including analysis of environmental
movements in the US and abroad; understanding the functions of government agencies that have an environmental mission;
and considering the relationship between civil litigation and environmental policy and management. In this course, we
consider these issues as a means to understand the development and operation of environmental interest groups ranging
from non-profits to professional lobbying firms, with the intent of building foundational skills needed to be successful in a
career focused on environmental advocacy.

END

Environmental Impact Assessment

ENST 94400:

Prerequisites: Must have completed any 4-credit lab course as well as two other courses housed within the Department of Geography,
Planning & Sustainability

This is a three-credit, senior-level course designed to introduce students to a systematic process for predicting and
evaluating the significant environmental consequences of a proposed action or undertaking. The range of environmental
impact assessments and techniques including infrastructure projects, such as power plants, highways, pipelines, dams, mines,
airports, incinerators and landfills will be explored. Assessment processes have also been used to consider the implications of
new technologies, plans, and policies that may result in significant social, economic and biophysical effects. Finally, the
course focuses on how assessment processes and techniques are designed or should be designed to be effective, efficient and
fair.

END

Senior Seminar in Environmental & Sustainability Studies-WI

ENST 94401:

Prerequisites: ENST 94121 and (COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201)

Students participate in planning a research project, collecting data, and preparing a report suitable for publication.
Research topics are selected according to student interests.

END

ENST 94402:

Students participate in planning a research project, collecting data, and preparing a report suitable for publication.
Research topics are selected according to student interests.

Seminar In Environmental Studies II

END

ENST 94403:

This course provides individual enrollment semester hours in directed study and/or research under the supervision of a
faculty member. Topics will vary.

Independent Study - Environmental Studies

END

Earth, People, And The Environment

GEOG 16100:

This course provides a broad survey of the geographic approach to knowledge about the world and the field of geography.
The course introduces the natural order of the physical environment, human modification of environments, organization of
society, and regional studies. The course places particular emphasis on contemporary environmental problems and the role
of geography in helping to understand and address local, regional, and global issues.

END

Sustainability 101

GEOG 16101:

Modern global industrial civilization has reached a crossroads with the planetary limits of the global ecosystem including
climate change, environmental contamination and mass species extinction with profound implications for the future quality
and viability of life. This course examines the roots of unsustainable human behavior and the trends leading toward
ecological overshoot. Students will learn about the emerging responses to these challenges and the multiple initiatives across
sectors aimed at shifting humanity to a sustainable mode of existence. The course will explore the prospects for a
Sustainability Revolution across geographies and scales and extrapolate future possible scenarios that will define the fate of
the earth and the quality of life for future generations. The course is organized into 3 independent modules allowing the
number of modules covered to reflect the number of credits the course is offered in a given semester.

END

Cultural Geography

GEOG 16110:

This course focuses upon the varied and changing cultural environments of the world. Through a synthesis of data from
many disciplines (i.e., anthropology, ecology, earth sciences, history, etc.), major cultural differences and areal patterns are
identified and analyzed.

END

Earth Sciences Laboratory I

GEOG 16130:

Intended to develop an understanding of the physical factors of the Earth as human habitat and human adjustments to
them, this course emphasizes the analysis of world distributional patterns of landforms, climate, vegetation, soils, and water
features, and causes of relationships of these patterns. The integrated laboratory components provide student participation
and experiences in observing, measuring, gathering data, analyzing underlying principles in such sub-fields as
geomorphology, climatology, pedology, remote sensing, hydrology, geology, and mapping sciences. Students will be exposed
to field techniques during one mandatory Saturday field trip. This course fulfills the Rowan Core Scientific Literacy.

END

GEOG 16131:

This course examines the basic concepts of astronomy, meteorology, geology and the principles derived from these
concepts.

Principles Of Earth Science

END

Meteorology

GEOG 16133:

This course studies the basic principles of meteorology, acquainting students with the physical principles underlying
weather phenomena. Students use weather instrumentation in weather observations and analyze weather maps and observe
and record daily weather changes.

END

World Regional Geography

GEOG 16140:

A survey of the entire world that uses the regional approach to geographical analysis, this course provides students with a
basic foundation of geographic knowledge and concepts applicable to the contemporary world. It stresses resource
distribution, environmental characteristics, population problems, food and water supplies, cultural variations and
developmental strategies.

END

Digital Earth: Mapping and Geographic Information Science

GEOG 16160:

This course provides the student with the conceptual tools required for intelligent and critical use, interpretation and
analysis of maps. In addition, the course furnishes the student with an introduction to and overview of the mapping
sciences. Students learn the concepts, methods, and techniques common to the several branches of the mapping sciences
and are introduced to cartography, satellite remote sensing, computer-assisted cartography, and geographical information
systems. Because of its increasing importance, special emphasis is placed on geographical information systems. This course
fulfills the Rowan Core Artistic Literacy.

END

US & Canada

GEOG 16240:

A regional study of the United States and Canada in terms of the areal distribution of physical features, population
patterns and economic activities, this course stresses an analysis of the forces stimulating change within the regional
patterns.

END

Geography Of New Jersey

GEOG 16241:

A systematic and regional approach to the geography of this, the most densely populated state, this course analyzes the
physical environment and cultural milieu in terms of their complex interactions. The course highlights problems of resource
utilization and environmental concerns.

END

Selected Topics In Geography And Environment

GEOG 16250:

This course is designed to introduce students to emerging topics in Geography and Environmental Studies. The content
will vary based on the topic chosen by the instructor. However, a given topic will not be repeated sooner than 3 years.
Consent of the instructor is necessary, and prerequisites are determined by the nature of the topic.

END

Fundamentals of Geographic Information Systems (GIS)

GEOG 16260:

Prerequisites: GEOG 16160

Fundamentals of Geographic Information Systems introduces students to the concepts and applications associated with
creating, maintaining, analyzing, displaying, and interpreting geospatial data. Through the completion of activities and
assignments, students gain experience with the fundamental tools for geospatial analysis, coupled with the knowledge of
how best to apply them to real-world issues in the natural and human landscapes.

END

Cartography

GEOG 16261:

Prerequisites: GEOG 16160

This course studies the elements of cartography with emphasis on the map as a basic form of communication. It explores
contemporary design concepts and various graphic techniques. Students create cartographic compositions using the latest in
geographical information system and cartographic software using the facilities of the department's computer teaching
laboratory.

END

History & Methods of Modern Geography

GEOG 16290:

Prerequisites: Any two of the following courses: GEOG 16100,GEOG 16110,GEOG 16130,GEOG 16140, GEOG 16160

This course provides the theoretical foundation to the field of geography. It explores the different bodies of thought and
methodological practices which have shaped the character of geography from the late 19th century to the present. This
exploration will cross the traditional sub-disciplinary divisions of human geography, physical geography and GIScience,
examining the ways in which all three have been woven together and pulled apart by broad intellectual trends in the
discipline. When the course is finished, students should be able to place their own research into disciplinary context, and
gain a useful perspective on the similarities and differences between contemporary geographic subfields, and their methods,
as contingent, historical products.

END

GEOG 16301:

Natural Resources, Capitalism, and Society

Prerequisites: GEOG 16290 or ENST 94102 or ECON 04101 or ECON 04102 or POSC 07200

This course is a survey of world patterns of economic development, including the distribution patterns of population,
natural and agricultural resources, and manufacturing and service endeavors. Emphasis is placed on spatial variations in types
of economic organization and patterns of land and resource utilization. This course may not be offered annually.

END

GEOG 16302:

A study of the geographic principles related to the distribution, growth, function, structure and regional setting of urban
centers, this course emphasizes spatial aspects of contemporary urban problems in the U.S.

Urban Geography

END

Political Geography

GEOG 16303:

Studying political units as spatial phenomena, this course focuses upon the wide range of geographic factors affecting past
and present variations of world political organizations and the interrelationships of regional political units. It analyzes
"Geopolitik," "The Heartland Theory," and other political-geographic concepts, as well as selected problem areas. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

Population Geography

GEOG 16304:

This course provides a spatial analysis of population parameters as they exist in the contemporary world, examining
demographic, cultural and economic variables and how they affect certain population groups. This course may not be
offered annually.

END

Transportation Planning and Policy

GEOG 16307:

This course provides an introduction to transportation planning and policy in the 21st Century United States context. The
course examines all aspects of the modern transportation system, from questions of accessibility and financing to equity and
sustainability. Students will acquire a comprehensive knowledge of how transportation systems work and how our society
will need to improve them in the near future.

END

Sensing the Sustainable City

GEOG 16308:

This course explores the role of sensory experience in environmental design, planning, and practice. Beginning with the
assertion that sustainable cities must be designed for people (not cars), this course carefully examines the human dimension
in the making of healthy, happy, and just human habitats. Timely topics in sustainable urbanism will be examined through
the senses, including, for example, biophilia, walkability, happy cities, green aesthetics, and universal design.

END

Cultural Landscapes

GEOG 16312:

This course explores how various physical landscapes reflect and exemplify the values, beliefs and ideas of a particular
culture. It traces the transition of spaces to places, looks to the past for clues as to the relationship societies have had with
the land, and examines the role of planning in building representative communities today. The course also considers the
visual aspect of a cultural landscape, and how its message is captured and processed both by our senses and by our
technology.

END

Geography of Beer

GEOG 16321:

Beer is the world’s most consumed alcoholic beverage and each beer’s unique flavor is impacted by both the physical
environment from which the ingredients come, as well as the people who made it. Through lecture, readings, discussions,
field-trips, and a case study final project, students in Geography of Beer will learn foundational principles of physical
geography that influence food and beverage production, as well as the cultural and economic aspects of society that drive the
production of certain food and beverages in particular places.

END

Geography of the National Parks

GEOG 16331:

This travelling geology course introduces students to the geology, and along the way geography, of the western United
States using national parks and national monuments as field laboratories. Students will learn the basics of western geology
while visiting some of the most spectacular natural regions in the world including Death Valley, the Grand Canyon,
Yellowstone, Grand Teton, Crater Lake and Yosemite National Parks.

END

Geomorphology

GEOG 16332:

Prerequisites: GEOG 16330 OR GEOL 14100

A study of the evolution of land forms, this course examines the processes and physical factors which determine the
development of the various types of landscape throughout the world by using case studies.

END

The Geography of Natural Disasters

GEOG 16334:

There are thousands of examples in which the forces of nature have suddenly claimed human lives and destroyed manmade
constructions on a large scale. This course will introduce the nature, causes, risks, effects, and prediction of natural disasters
including earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, landslides, subsidence, global climate change, severe weather, coastal erosion,
floods, mass extinctions, and meteorite impacts. It will cover geologic principles and case histories of natural disasters and
human responses (societal impact, mitigation strategies, and public policy).

END

Field Studies In Geography

GEOG 16335:

This course provides students with field research skills necessary to geographic research. It emphasizes techniques of field
observation and recording, using a combination of lecture-discussion and field practice. This course may not be offered
annually.

END

Climatology

GEOG 16338:

A study designed to develop an understanding of the elements and controls associated with various climatic phenomena,
this course examines the consequences of climatic variations and interrelationships with other physical and cultural
environmental features. It focuses on the physical and applied aspects of climatology. This course may not be offered
annually.

END

Geography Of Europe

GEOG 16342:

An intensive study of the physical and cultural characteristics of the European continent and the individual countries of
which it is comprised, this course examines such topics as regional integration, international problems, changing patterns of
economic development, political stability and shifting population patterns. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Geography Of Asia

GEOG 16343:

This course examines the major environmental features of Asia, stressing problems of population pressure and land
utilization. The course studies individual culture realms and selected countries intensively. This course may not be offered
annually.

END

GEOG 16344:

This course studies the physical and cultural bases of Latin America's geographic patterns, giving special emphasis to
problems of resource development, population trends, and economic activity. This course may not be offered annually.

Geography Of Latin America

END

Geography Of Africa

GEOG 16345:

An analysis of the diverse environmental factors, cultural groupings and national states comprising the African continent,
this course emphasizes the problems of resource development and political stability of the newly emerging nations. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

Geography of Russia and Its Neighbors

GEOG 16346:

This course studies in depth the geography of the former Soviet Union by focusing on regional variations in population
distribution, cultural and ethnic inputs and physical environmental constraints. It emphasizes the respective roles of past
centralized planning under Communist doctrine, practical experiences and resource distribution as they influenced
economic development and, in effect, changed the geography of the area to a major degree in the 20th century. It further
examines the consequences of the break-up of the U.S.S.R. on the 15 separate countries. This course may not be offered
annually.

END

Geography Of The Middle East

GEOG 16347:

This course is a survey of the physical environmental factors as they affect the patterns of settlement, land utilization and
economic development of the regions and individual countries that comprise the Middle East. This course emphasizes the
geographic bases for the current Arab-Israeli dispute. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Quantitative and Qualitative Methods

GEOG 16350:

This course introduces quantitative and qualitative techniques designed especially for analysis of spatial patterns and
distributions. Students will learn a variety of inferential statistical methods, including basic elements of sampling, analysis of
variance, and probability. Students will also learn how to combine knowledge learned from these methods with qualitative
methods such as interviews, focus groups, and observation.

END

Foundation In Geographic Knowledge-WI

GEOG 16355:

This course will develop a deep and fluent understanding of geography and its evolution in America's intellectual and
educational landscape. It will focus on the themes and essential elements in geography education with the goal of facilitating
students' understanding of geography's evolutionary history and the relationships between geographic phenomena and other
programs and disciplines. Students will learn how to include geographic thinking to solve real-world problems. The course
may not be offered every semester.

END

Applications of Geographic Information Systems

GEOG 16360:

Prerequisites: GEOG 16260

Applications of Geographic Information Systems builds upon the foundational concepts introduced in pre-requisite
courses to examine the concepts and techniques of advanced geospatial analysis. Building upon a series of techniques,
coupled with real-world applications, students employ geospatial data and methods to complile, analyze, visualize, and
interpret results, as well as examine critical issues related to data management and maintenance. The course is intended to
prepare the student for both the professional GIS workforce and advanced research with GIS.

END

Geovisualization

GEOG 16361:

Prerequisites: GEOG 16160

This course explores geovisualization and related GIS and cartographic techniques. Geovisualization communicates
geospatial information in ways that allow for data exploration and decision-making processes. Techniques covered include
temporal modeling of processes over time and 3D fly-thru of virtual terrain. The techniques are applied to real-world
problem solving in fields such as environmental modeling, planning, archeology, crime mapping and natural resource
management.

END

Geospatial Measurement and Environmental Modeling

GEOG 16365:

Prerequisites: GEOG 16160

This course introduces advanced techniques in the GIS data manipulation, geostatistics and geospatial modeling. The
fundamental theories behind the analytical and modeling techniques are covered in detail. The theoretical knowledge will be
enforced by a series of intensive computer exercises using real data sets. It covers descriptive and predictive GIS modeling
techniques, including logit modeling (logistic regression), spatial statistics, geo-statistics, environmental diversity indices,
Boolean logic, and map algebra.

END

Drones, Planes, and Satellites

GEOG 16370:

Prerequisites: GEOG 16160

This course introduces students to techniques of spatial analysis using satellite imagery and aerial photography. It
intersperses practical exercises in photo interpretation and digital image processing with demonstrations that include a wide
range of photographic and non-photographic source material, including infra-red thermal and micro-wave images, digital
orthographic photos as well as LANDSAT and other satellite platforms.

END

Remote Sensing Of The Environment

GEOG 16375:

Prerequisites: GEOG 16260

This course emphasizes the integration of remotely sensed data into geographic information systems (GIS). It includes
applications of advanced remote sensing techniques and data processing for use in environmental planning and land resource
management. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Risks, Hazards, and Air Disasters

GEOG 16388:

Perhaps no other industry has been forged so directly by tragedy. Gut-wrenching disaster investigations have yielded an
industry that is statistically exemplar today, but is still subject to the same lens. This course is designed to explore where air
accidents are most likely to occur and why this is so. Factors including altitude, runway orientation, weather, language and
customs, delays, and pressure to "complete the mission" are often involved. There are an average of 7 human mistakes that
culminate in disaster, and the stresses caused by these factors are believed by experts to play a major role in the accident
chain of events. The course will also review accident causation models and employ case studies from the National
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) Aviation Accident Reports and those from international agencies.

END

Geography Research Clinic/Studio

GEOG 16390:

This course presents a project-based experience for students working with a faculty mentor. Modeled on the engineering
clinic and a traditional planning studio, students apply knowledge gained through their previous coursework to solve a
particular research, policy or planning problem. Projects will be solicited from local agencies and businesses and students
will work as individuals or within teams to provide viable solutions.

END

Directed Geographic Field Experiences

GEOG 16391:

This course offers an introduction to geographic field research methods, class field trips to places chosen by instructor and
students. Students will complete a field research project taken on a topic chosen in consultation with the instructor. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

Web-Based GIS Mapping

GEOG 16462:

This course introduces web-based mapping technologies and applications. Students will gain the skills of creating their
own map services which can then be used to create custom web-based maps. The course will focus on both open-source and
commercial software packages to produce mapping and data services. Students will also explore the client-side offerings to
produce mapping applications. The course culminates in a final web mapping project.

END

Research Seminar in Geography

GEOG 16489:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and GEOG 016290

Students participate in planning a research project, collecting data and preparing a report suitable for publication including
cartographic materials. Research subjects are selected according to student interest. This course is regularly offered and may
be available as a hybrid or online format.

END

Undergraduate Research Seminar In Geography (Senior Seminar) - WI

GEOG 16490:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and GEOG 16290

Students participate in planning a research project, collecting data and preparing a report suitable for publication including
cartographic materials. Research subjects are selected according to student interest. This course is regularly offered and may
be available as a hybrid or online format.

END

GEOG 16491:

Students have an opportunity to pursue individual specialized topics under the guidance of a staff member. This course
may not be used as a substitute for a course offered by the department.

Independent Study in Geography

END

Workshop In Geography

GEOG 16553:

This course is designed for in-service teachers who wish to further develop their competencies in new teaching techniques
and technologies in geography, including computer-assisted instruction and computer cartography. Contemporary
geographic topics will be explored within a regional context of each major world region. Students will actively participate in
applying new concepts, current data, and innovative techniques in geography by designing and presenting sample lessons at
their grade level. (Summer only)

END

Cartography

GEOG 16561:

Prerequisites: GEOG 16560 or GEOG 16160 or permission of the instructor

This course studies the elements of cartography with emphasis on the map as a basic form of communication. It explores
contemporary design concepts and various graphic techniques. Students create cartographic compositions using the latest in
geographical information system and cartographic software using the facilities of the department's computer teaching
laboratory. This course is targeted toward graduate students.

END

Geographic Information Systems (GIS) Topics And Applications

GEOG 16565:

Geographic Information Systems (GIS) Topics and Applications provides an extended exploration into geospatial science
and analysis at the graduate level. Students develop advanced GIS skills through a project-based approach culminating in a
final project and presentation. The course deepens the understanding of raster and vector data structures as well as the
ability to work with computational algorithms used in GIS analysis. Students learn through lectures, demonstrations,
computer laboratory sessions and a project paper and presentation.

END

GEOG 16591:

This course provides individual enrollment semester hours in directed study and/or research under the supervision of a
faculty member. Topics will vary.

Independent Study in Geography

END

Earth, People, Environment

PLAN 31100:

This course provides a broad survey of spatial and place-based approaches to knowledge about the world and the place of
humans within it. The course introduces the natural order of the physical environment, human modification of
environments, organization of society, planning and regional studies. The course places particular emphasis on
contemporary environmental problems and the role of spatial and place-based perspectives in helping to understand and
address local, regional, and global issues related to the environment.

END

Intro to City Planning

PLAN 31280:

This course provides students with a conceptual foundation to the field of planning. Topics include the history and
development of planning, the politics of planning, planning analysis and implementation, urban design, environmental
planning and planning implementation process and management. Particular emphasis is placed on the current trends in the
field including ecological based planning, redevelopment and sustainable communities.

END

Introduction to Historic Preservation

PLAN 31340:

This course introduces students to the practice of historic preservation as undertaken by urban and regional planners.
Students learn about different philosophical approaches to preservation, as well as cultural awareness of different types of
and needs for preservation. Students learn the legal and regulatory aspects of historic preservation, as well as how to gather
information about historic properties, buildings, and other spaces in order to advance preservation efforts. Preservation
technologies are examined, as are efforts to advance goals of sustainability within preservation.

END

Quantitative & Qualitative Methods

PLAN 31350:

This course introduces quantitative and qualitative techniques designed especially for analysis of spatial patterns and
distributions. Students will learn a variety of inferential statistical methods, including basic elements of sampling, analysis of
variance, and probability. Students will also learn how to combine knowledge learned from these methods with qualitative
methods such as interviews, focus groups, and observation.

END

Planning Methods

PLAN 31351:

This course equips students with a variety of quantitative planning methods to examine economic, social, demographic,
spatial and political structures of typical U.S. metropolitan areas. Students will integrate concepts and models from the
social sciences and apply them to current trends and problems in planning. Students learn tools that are widely used in the
field of planning to examine existing conditions and project into the future.

END

Airport Planning, Systems Design, and Management

PLAN 31377:

The course and text are focused on major commercial airports that have annual passenger counts exceeding 1 million. We
will also explore a handful of smaller regional airports and military facilities that play (or can play) a supporting role when
conditions or events dictate alternatives to the major commercial facility such as Gander, Newfoundland played during the
911 terror attacks.

END

Planning History, Theory, & Ethics

PLAN 31380:

Prerequisites: PLAN 31280

This course provides a chronological review of the major theoretical trends that have shaped the field of planning,
including a review of theories that define what planning is and the ethics that inform current planning practice.

END

Introduction to Smart Cities and Society

PLAN 31381:

What makes a community smart, sustainable, and healthy? What technological advancements or trends do we need to be
aware of while designing smart cities? How do smart cities create data using sensors to combat the causes and effects of
pollution and climate change? What are the consequences of smart city initiatives on environmental sustainability, social
equity, and quality of life? How do smart city planners engage the public in their decision-making process? What are the
challenges or opportunities of smart city planning and implementation? What are the major critiques? This course uses a
social science lens to address these questions and review the emerging digital technologies applied in smart city design,
management, and governance, within the context of both the Global North and Global South. The course content is
appropriate for future planners, geographers, policymakers, and relevant professionals.

END

Metropolitan/Regional Planning

PLAN 31383:

Prerequisites: PLAN 31280

This course studies the philosophy, history, techniques, and problems of metropolitan and regional planning. Although it
focuses on large scale-planning in the United States, the course makes some comparative analysis of planning in other
countries. It emphasizes geographic techniques in regional analysis, as well as the roles of federal, state, and local agencies in
planning. Students learn and use simulation and gaming techniques in the preparation of regional plans. This course may not
be offered annually.

END

Water Resources Planning

PLAN 31384:

Prerequisites: PLAN 31280

This course explores water management planning and the public decision making process in metropolitan areas. Topics
covered include analysis of systems, resources and issues affecting water supply and treatment.

END

New Jersey Applied Planning Practice

PLAN 31385:

Prerequisites: PLAN 31280

This course will cover planning in New Jersey, its legal basis and how it is practiced. It will cover the specifics of the local
planning boards, zoning board of appeals, master planning, planning procedures and processes. Topics such as affordable
housing, regional planning coordination, smart growth, and physical design will be addressed.

END

Land Use And Conservation

PLAN 31386:

Prerequisites: PLAN 31280

This course examines people's changing perceptions of the economic use potential of land focusing on how land is a
combination of physical, economic, political and cultural interactions. The course explores the basics of land use law,
property rights, land use conflicts and the various avenues for land conservation and open space preservation.

END

Food Systems Planning

PLAN 31387:

This course explores the food supply chains within the US that bring food from the field to the table and describes the
ways that planners are utilizing traditional planning tools to build more sustainable and resilient regionally based food
systems. Students will compare both conventional and alternative supply chains identifying the benefits and limitations of
both, as well as examine the policy and programmatic initiatives taken by planners to maximize these benefits and minimize
these limitations. Additional topics include land conservation, food access, urban agriculture and economic development.

END

Environmental / Sustainable Planning

PLAN 31389:

Prerequisites: PLAN 31280

Environmental/Sustainable Planning addresses the advances and trends that are occuring related to environmental and
sustainability issues within the field of planning from a local to global perspective. The course will explore some of the
national trends of environmental and sustainable planning focusing on programs such as the U.S. Green Building Council's
LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) programs for fostering green building and smart growth
development. The course will also cover some specific New Jersey environmental planning issues such as the Pinelands,
open space preservation and smart growth initiatives.

END

Planning Clinic

PLAN 31390:

This course presents a project-based experience for students working with a faculty mentor. Modeled on the engineering
clinic and a traditional planning studio, students apply knowledge gained through their previous coursework to solve a
particular research, policy or planning problem. Projects will be solicited from local agencies and businesses and students
will work as individuals or within teams to provide viable solutions.

END

Community Planning, Engagement, and Design

PLAN 31486:

Prerequisites: PLAN 31280

This course introduces various planning methods applied in community planning, community engagement, and community
design activities by using a Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) framework. The course content focuses on spatial or
physical planning topics such as the design, arrangement, appearance, and functionality of building sites, neighborhoods,
towns and cities, as well as the shaping and uses of safe public spaces. The course also explores sustainable design principles,
techniques, and practices related to spatial or physical planning. Students explore design elements at both macro and micro

END

Research Seminar in Planning-WI

PLAN 31490:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and PLAN 31350 and PLAN 31351

Students participate in planning a research project, collecting data and preparing a report suitable for publication including
public outreach materials. Students learn how to develop a problem statement, conduct a literature review, create and
implement a pilot study, analyze data, and communicate results. Research subjects are selected according to student
interest. This course is regularly offered and may be available as a hybrid or online format.

END

Planning Studio-WI

PLAN 31495:

Prerequisites: GEOG 16.160 AND PLAN 31.280 AND PLAN 31.385 AND PLAN 31.486

Undergraduate planning students produce a "plan" in this studio course. Under direct supervision of planning faculty,
students undertake a planning project in collaboration with a local, regional, national, or international client. Working in
small groups, students apply their relevant knowledge and skills gained from previous coursework. As appropriate, students
engage community stakeholders and assess their interests. The final product of this studio course is a professional-level plan
or a policy report.

END

Food Systems I: Agribusiness and "Big Food"

RFS 11300:

This course examines the current supply chains of the US food industry from growers to retail markets, with scholarly
emphasis placed on “Big Food;” a term referencing the consolidation of corporate actors and the domination of food
product markets by a small number of companies. The class community will develop an understanding of the complex
relationships of various actors across the supply chain and the key forces foundational to US agribusiness and its resulting
outcomes. Students will review various drivers influencing production, distribution, processing, major markets, and the
outcomes from this system. Course material will challenge students to consider essential questions in context to the impact
of the food system on the environment, economy, and social and human health through case study research.

END

Physical Geology

GEOL 01101:

This course introduces the fundamental concepts of the physical Earth through geology. Within this course students
explore the physical features of the Earth’s surface and interior and the geological processes leading to their constant
change. Topics include plate tectonics, mountain building, volcanism, earthquakes, weathering and erosion, and the internal
structure and materials that make up the Earth. Laboratory exercises provide a practical understanding of physical geology
through solving problems based in geology. The course will have a field trip to Edelman Fossil Park. The course is suitable
for all students.

END

Earth Through Time

GEOL 01102:

In this course we examine the history of Planet Earth as it is recorded in the geological record. The course emphasizes
geological time and the evolution of the Earth and its organisms over time. We explore the fundamental processes that have
shaped the Earth and the various lifeforms that have inhabited it. The laboratory component emphasizes principles of
geological interpretation involving visualization of time from a geological perspective and experiential learning about the
forms that have inhabited Earth in the past. The course will have at least one field trip to the Edelman Fossil Park.

END

Selected Topics in Geology

GEOL 01105:

The content of this course varies to reflect the role of geology in society, both past and present. A limited number of topics
are selected from the following: Planetary science, space exploration, climate change, applied geology, earthquakes and
volcanoes, paleontology (both invertebrate and vertebrate), mineral and energy resources within geology, geological hazards,
geology and the environment, geology and society. Students will explore the fundamental principles and emerging topics in
geology and their relationship to the human experience and society. The course is suitable for all students.

END

Dinosaurs and Their World

GEOL 01110:

An introduction to the “terrible lizards” that ruled our planet for over 150 million years. Emphasis will be placed on the
scientific method and its applications to the study of dinosaurs. Topics will include dinosaur evolution, interrelationships,
extinction, and the evolution of those dinosaurs still among us (birds). This course is suitable for all majors.

END

Edelman Fossil Park Experience

GEOL 01111:

During laboratory experiences and field trips to Jean and Ric Edelman Fossil Park at Rowan University, students will be
introduced to the principles of geology through laboratory and field experiences. Students will learn techniques involved in
fossil excavation, identification, preparation, and field data collection. Students will also assist with ongoing STEM
education outreach efforts. Through this class, students will experience science as a process from discovery to
dissemination. This course is suitable for all majors including exploratory studies.

END

Motion of Life

GEOL 01112:

This course will provide an introduction to the concepts and principles of evolution through the study of motion: learn
how evolution resulted in fish that walk, descendants of Velociraptor that fly, and apes that stand upright. This course
connects the evolutionary history of animals with their unique traits, locomotion styles, and influences on human
engineering and design. Topics covered will include the relationship between form and function in extinct and modern
animals, how evolutionary history influences this relationship, and the relevance of these topics to other fields ranging from
biomechanics to exercise science. The course is suitable for all majors.

END

Earthquakes and Volcanoes

GEOL 01120:

Earthquakes and volcanoes are major geologic phenomena that provide insight about the nature of the Earth hundreds of
kilometers beneath our feet. This course offers a broad overview of the geologic principles that govern earth processes at
tectonic plate margins. Students will learn about architecture, processes, and evolution of plate margins from the mantle to
the crust. By the end of the course, students will be able to use observations on the Earth's surface to predict deep Earth
processes associated with earthquakes and volcanoes. An emphasis will be placed on the impact of these phenomena on
civilization from a historical and a planning perspective.

END

Earth in Transition: The Science of Global Climate Change

GEOL 01131:

This course provides a scientific foundation for understanding one of the most significant and complex issues facing the
planet today: global climate change. It utilizes scientific evidence, theory, and inquiry to explore the fundamental physical
processes that drive the climate system; the human fingerprint on climate and our Earth more broadly; and the state of the
science regarding how climate has changed over the recent past and how it will continue to do so into the future. The
impacts of climate change will be investigated, including assessments of warming in Earth’s atmosphere and oceans, rising
sea level, variations in precipitation, changes to biological and ecological systems, and finally the potential consequences of
this change for global society, as well as the potential solutions. This course is suitable for all majors.

END

Climate, Catastrophes, Civilizations and Collapses

GEOL 01133:

This course explores how the Earth system processes that shape our physical environment can – via gradual or sudden
environmental change – stress human societies and cause them to collapse. In this course, we will examine the physical basis
of earth system processes that adversely affect human societies, including seismic events, geological hazards, and climate
variability. We will utilize scientific evidence and inquiry to critically assess case studies of past societies that attempted to
cope with environmental changes. How those societies had adapted to their environment, the environmental changes that
occurred, and the response of those societies to these stressors will be examined. We will use the concepts of environmental
vulnerability, resilience and societal collapse to examine the role environmental change has on society, how it relates to
other stressors, and how failures to identify, plan, or adapt to environmental hazards can lead to a society’s collapse. This
course is suitable for all majors.

END

Water Planet: Exploring the Hydrosphere

GEOL 01136:

The defining feature of our Planet is the deep blue of the world’s oceans, covering over 70% of the Earth surface area to
depths of up to 10 kilometers (5 miles). Despite centuries of exploration, humans have only visited an estimated 5% of the
ocean’s vast domain. In this course, we examine this fundamental and defining feature of planet earth – the oceans. We will
chart the history of modern ocean exploration and examine what we know about the oceans, ocean currents, and physical
forces that drive them. We will discuss the influence of the oceans on rainfall, drought, and climate, and the processes that
occur at the interface of the oceans and land at our coastlines with emphasis on the coast of New Jersey. The effect that the
ocean has had on human society, acting as both barrier and highway for trade and migration will be explored, and we will
examine how changes in ocean properties under future climate conditions may alter our relationship with the oceans. This
course is suitable for all majors including Exploratory Studies.

END

Voyager: The Exploration of Space

GEOL 01150:

The course encompasses how humans have explored space through the 20th and 21st centuries, covering both robotic and
human missions. The course looks at the past, present, and future proposed missions with an emphasis on the study of
planetary bodies. The course material will provide students with an in-depth appreciation of the relationship between the
physical sciences, engineering, and social sciences through the human desire to explore. Students will engage in processing of
real data from space missions and potentially contribute to active missions through this process. This course is suitable for
all majors.

END

Mineralogy and Petrology

GEOL 01201:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01101 with Concurrent Enrollment Allowed

Within this course students investigate the nature of Earth materials starting with the foundation material, minerals,
through exploring systematic mineralogy, mineral chemistry and optical theory as applied to mineral identification in thin
section. The course introduces students to the rock cycle, sedimentary, metamorphic and igneous rocks. In the course
explore how minerals and rocks are recorders of processes that shape the Earth and other planetary bodies. Laboratory
exercises are focused on developing practical knowledge of how to identify minerals and rocks as hand samples or thin
sections. Field experience is an integral part of the course.

END

Invertebrate Paleontology

GEOL 01210:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01101 with Concurrent Enrollment Allowed

The course will cover principles of invertebrate paleontology. In this course students will explore the fundamentals of
phylogenetic systematic, paleoecology, and the fundamentals of biomarkers in geologic time. The course provides hands-on
learning experience where students apply what they are learning in lecture to the identification of invertebrate fossils,
starting with the Cambrian radiative explosion through to the recent past. Laboratory and field experience are an integral
part of the course.

END

Paleoclimatology

GEOL 01230:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01101 and GEOL 01131

Earth’s climate has been in a state of flux for its entire 4.6-Billion-year history. Only recently have humans evolved and
become a leading driver of change. The scientific understanding of human’s role is derived in large part from an
understanding of past, natural climate variability reconstructed from geological and other paleoclimatological records.
Utilizing evidence, hypotheses, and theory derived from these climate archives, this course explores the mechanisms of
natural climate variability, timescales of change, and impacts of global change through Earth’s history. It concludes with
looking at where we are today in relation to the rich paleoclimatic record of global change. This course includes a closely
linked laboratory session incorporating applied analysis of climate and paleoclimate datasets.

END

Introduction to Field Methods in Geology

GEOL 01240:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01101 with Concurrent Enrollment Allowed

Introduction to Field Methods in Geology covers the principles of geological data collection and analysis through applied
field investigation. This course provides a survey of the fundamental methods in geological field analysis, including field
measurement, sampling, and mapping techniques. The course includes a weekly laboratory session and will include outdoor
field trips.

END

Ocean-Atmosphere Interactions

GEOL 01250:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01101 and GEOL 01102 and PHYS 00150 or PHYS 00210 or permission of instructor

The exchange of energy and water between the ocean and atmosphere drives large-scale weather patterns, influences local
climate, and are fundamental components of large-scale climate phenomena such as El Nino and La Nina. In this course we
will use scientific evidence and inquiry, understanding of physical principals and quantitative reasoning to explore the
physical forces that drive ocean and atmospheric circulation. We examine how energy and water move and are exchanged in
the ocean-atmosphere system, and how those interactions influence Earth’s climate. This course will discuss the movements
of air and water masses, major ocean currents, the effect of Earth’s rotation on ocean and atmospheric movement, winds,
weather and climate variability. This course is suitable for majors and minors in Geology and Geography, Planning and
Sustainability (GPS).

END

Advanced Field Methods

GEOL 01301:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01240

This course builds off of GEOL 01240 and explores more detailed methods of field techniques in the geosciences. Students
will learn how to map and correctly illustrate geologic formation and construct geological maps and interpret the geological
history of the mapped areas. The course is both laboratory and field intensive. The course has a laboratory component.

END

Advanced Topics in Geology

GEOL 01303:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01102

The content of this course varies to reflect the role of geology in society, both past and present and difference from GEOL
01105 in that the subject material is covered at a more rigorous level than the first-year course. A limited number of topics
are selected from the following: Planetary science, space exploration, climate change, applied geology, earthquakes and
volcanoes, paleontology (both invertebrate and vertebrate), mineral and energy resources within geology, geological hazards,
geology and the environment, geology and society. Students will explore the fundamental principles, advance science, and
emerging topics in geology and their relationship to the human experience and society. This course is open to geology
majors.

END

Paleontology Laboratory Techniques

GEOL 01310:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01102

Paleontology Laboratory Techniques provides an overview of the most common steps involved in laboratory research of
fossils, including training in fossil preparation methods, how to identify fossil remains, specimen photography, scientific
illustration, preparation of histologic slides, how to create molds and casts of fossils, and curation techniques. The course
also includes learning how to construct a research poster and give an effective oral presentation on research within the field
of paleontology.

END

Vertebrate Paleontology

GEOL 01311:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01102

The course examines the evolutionary history of vertebrates, ranging from the origin of chordates in the Cambrian to the
rise of dinosaurs, mammals, and hominids. Emphases are placed on the anatomical diagnoses of vertebrate clades and their
phylogenetic relationships, as well as major milestones in vertebrate evolution such as the origins of terrestrial locomotion
and flight. Lab exercises examine skeletal anatomy of vertebrates, functional adaptations, and the role of skeletons in
discerning phylogenetic interrelationship of vertebrates.

END

Dinosaur Paleontology

GEOL 01312:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01102

This course examines the origin and evolutionary history of non-avian dinosaurs, including their extinction. Emphases are
placed on the anatomical diagnoses of dinosaur clades and their phylogenetic relationships, the origin of birds, and
functional adaptations exhibited by dinosaurs. Lab exercises will examine the anatomy of dinosaur bones, adaptations
exhibited by dinosaurs, and the role of their skeletons in discerning their phylogenetic interrelationships.

END

Breathing Life into Fossils: The Science of Paleoart

GEOL 01313:

In this course, students will learn how scientists and artists combine anatomical studies of fossils, comparative anatomy,
phylogenetics, geology, and art in order to accurately reconstruct life and environments through geologic time. Students will
learn basic musculoskeletal and soft-tissue anatomy, plus taphonomy, sedimentology, and paleoecology. Students will also
review the most recent research and findings concerning the reconstruction of ancient life. The course will involve reading
literature, anatomical sketching, and utilizing knowledge gained to create a scientifically accurate depiction of extinct
organisms.

END

Sedimentology and Stratigraphy

GEOL 01320:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01101

Sedimentary rocks record key information for helping to decipher Earth’s history. Sedimentology is the study of
sediments, their transport, and ultimate deposition. Stratigraphy is the analysis of the resulting sedimentary formations and
the information these provide on past environments. This course encompasses the study of modern sedimentary processes,
as well as the analysis and interpretation of sedimentary and depositional environments through the geological record. It is a
hands-on learning experience encompassing lectures, laboratory analysis, and fieldwork.

END

Basin Analysis

GEOL 01321:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01201 and GEOL 01320

Sedimentary basins archive the record of rising and falling mountains, the migration of ancient oceans, and can even
indicate changes in the composition of the Earth hundreds of kilometers below the surface. This course prepares students to
integrate exposures of sedimentary rocks to make interpretations about regional subsidence mechanisms that form
sedimentary basins and identify how these mechanisms evolve through geologic time. In the first half of the class, students
will learn to distinguish the genetic properties of different sedimentary basins. The second half of the course will introduce
techniques for analyzing these basins including measurements and observations of sedimentology, geochronology and
thermochronology tools, geochemical evidence of paleoclimate conditions, and analytical modeling techniques. The course
will include a major field-based project which will provide students with the opportunity to use the concepts from the course
to analyze a basin from outcrop. Because sedimentary basins contain many resources including hydrocarbons, ores, and
water, the course will integrate activities with that integrate applied problems in the fields of energy, sustainability, and
resource management.

END

Climate Change and the Cryosphere

GEOL 01331:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01131 or GEOL 01101 or consent of instructor

In this course we explore the cryosphere, Earth’s glaciers, ice sheets, ice caps, sea ice, snow, and permafrost. We investigate
the cryosphere as an integrated component of global Earth systems, assessing how climate change impacts the cryosphere,
and conversely, how cryospheric changes impact the broader earth system. This is a lab-based course in which we will
analyze, observe and model cryosphere and climatic datasets and discuss emerging topics in the science of Earth’s cold
places.

END

Tectonics and Structural Geology

GEOL 01340:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01201 and GEOL 01240

The course introduces students to the science of how Earth material deform, broke, and are changed through gaining
knowledge of the processes that produce these changes. The course focuses on the importance of plate tectonics with the
practical application of tectonic forces on the geological rock system. The course has a laboratory component.

END

Advanced Petrology

GEOL 01350:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01201

The course completes a students required learning in minerals and rocks and picks-up where GEOL 01201 ends. Students
receive more detailed knowledge of rocks with the course focused on the understanding in detail the of various rock types
including gaining knowledge of phase diagrams. The course has a laboratory component. Field experience is an integral part
of the course.

END

Geochemistry

GEOL 01353:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01201

In this course we explore the chemistry of geological materials and the importance of geochemical signatures with geologic
systems for understanding the origins and evolution of minerals and rocks. In the course both practical and theoretical
geochemistry is emphasized within low and high temperature geological systems. The course has a laboratory component
that emphasizes the practical application of the science learned in lecture.

END

Practical Experience in Geology

GEOL 01400:

Prerequisites: Restricted to B.S. in Geology major only

To train future geologists in the B.S. degree program, a summer internship is required. This internship can follow a classic
geology pathway through a departmentally approved field course through another university, or a departmentally approved
internship such as a Research Experience for Undergraduates (NSF funded) offered by another university. Students in the
B.S. degree program must take this course during the summer of their third year.

END

Taphonomy

GEOL 01410:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01102

All living organisms eventually succumb to the same end: death. Taphonomy is the study of everything that happens to an
organism from the time of its death until its discovery as a fossil. This course explores the varied environmental, geologic,
and biologic processes that act on organic remains after death, including how these processes can bias the fossil record or
yield information about past ecosystems. The course has a laboratory component that compliments the lecture series.

END

Paleoecology

GEOL 01411:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01102

This course explores the ecological relationships of dinosaurs and other extinct organisms through paleontological
evidence. Combining the fields of paleontology, geology, and biology, this course examines how paleontologists can
reconstruct aspects of the inter- and intraspecific behavior of organisms in the past, including predator-prey relationships,
sociality, migration, and parenting. Students will also learn methods for characterizing ancient ecosystem structures and
apply these techniques to characterize the paleoecology of a fossil assemblage. The course has a laboratory component that
compliments the lecture series.

END

Macroevolution in the Fossil Record

GEOL 01412:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01210

Change through time of populations of a species, called microevolution, has become accepted as scientific fact. But how do
entire communities evolve? Macroevolution in the Fossil Record explores the evolution of taxonomic groups larger than an
individual species over geologic timescales. Topics covered will include cladogenesis, causes and effects of mass extinctions,
rates of speication and extinction, controls of biodiversity, and the roles of sex and body size in evolution, with an emphasis
placed on examples of these processes in the fossil record.

END

Paleobiology

GEOL 01413:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01102

In this course, students will explore what scientists know about the biology of extinct organisms and the methods used to
discern these insights. Topics covered will include areas of active paleontological research such as coloration, growth,
gender, metabolism, and locomotion. Using primary literature, scientific debates within these areas will also be investigated
and discussed. The course has a laboratory component that is a compliment to the lecture series.

END

Hydrogeology

GEOL 01421:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01320

Water is among Earth’s most precious commodities. In the course, we explore the hydrologic cycle, as it pertains to water
moving through rocks and sediment. Students will study aquifers and examine the effects of human activity on groundwater.
The Edelman Fossil Park will serve as a living laboratory for this course. The course has a laboratory component that
emphasizes the practical application of the science learned in lecture.

END

Climate Variability and Diagnostics

GEOL 01430:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01131 and CS 01104 and MATH 01130 and GEOL 01250 or consent of instructor

In this course, we explore global- and regional-scale atmospheric and oceanic variability, as well as observed and projected
manifestations of anthropogenic forcing. This course emphasizes hands-on laboratory experience in applying diagnostic
spatial and temporal analyses to a wide range of state-of-the-art observational (e.g., instrumental, satellite, reanalysis) and
modeled climate data products.

END

Tectonic Scale Climate Change

GEOL 01432:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01230

Major environmental change through geologic time (until the Anthropocene) is driven by the tectonic (long-term) carbon
cycle. In this course, we will review the processes that link short- and long-term carbon cycling, ultimately focusing on the
tectonic processes that move carbon between Earth’s organic and inorganic reservoirs on “deep” timescales ranging from
hundreds of thousands to billions of years. On a journey through time, students will hypothesize about how the drastic
changes in our planet’s past climates—from Snowball earth to the Cretaceous Hothouse—are derived from the interplay
between these tectonic (lithospheric) processes and the atmosphere, hydrosphere, and biosphere. The class will culminate in
discussions about what we can learn from tectonic-scale (deep time) climate change that has implications for the
development of (and evaluation of) the geologic processes that underlie modern climate solutions. Course activities will
include reading and discussion of classic and current papers, lecture, and group exercises/investigations.

END

The Ice Ages and Quaternary Geology

GEOL 01435:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01101 and (GEOL 01102 may be taken concurrently)

This course explores the intervals of Earth history dominated by large ice sheets focusing on the last two Epochs of Earth
history, the Pleistocene and Holocene. These periods have featured large variations in climate, changes in ocean circulation,
the growth and decay of continental ice sheet, the evolution and extinction of large mega-fauna, and the rise and eventual
dispersal of a moderately clever tool using ape from the African plains. Topics covered include glacial and ice sheet processes
and dynamics; terrestrial, lacustrine, and marine paleoclimate records of the Pleistocene and Holocene; glacial
geomorphology and landforms; and the impact of glaciation on the carbon cycle, hydrologic cycle, fauna, flora and human
evolution.

END

Geochronology and Thermochronology

GEOL 01440:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01201

Quantitative geochronology provides the boundary conditions for understanding the evolution of the Earth and other
planetary bodies by providing the ability to calculate dates and rates of Earth and planetary events and processes. The utility
of geochronology transcends the field of Geology and proves useful in fields such as archaeology, ecology, and marine
science. This course will build a foundation in the processes of radioactive decay, trace element behavior, diffusion as well as
differentiation and recycling in the Earth and solar system. Students will apply this fundamental material to derive and
calculate dates from suites of chronometers from high (geochronometers) and low (thermochornometers) temperature
systems. The course will investigate applications of these techniques in understanding tectonic, climatic, and erosional
processes.

END

Glacial Geology

GEOL 01445:

Prerequisites: GEOL 01102 and GEOL 01230

At their most basic level glaciers are simple systems responding to changes in temperature and precipitation (i.e. climate),
and are therefore key to understanding Earth’s climate system. In this course, students will explore the mechanisms and
processes behind glacier movement and deformation, how glaciers interact with the surface of the Earth, and how glaciers
both affect, and are affected by, changes in climate. Students will use this knowledge to then interpret past glacier activity
recorded in the geologic record, what that information says about past changes in climate and sea level, and how it is relevant
to understanding future climate change.

END

GEOL 01450:

Senior Seminar in Geology

Prerequisites: Enrollment in B.S. or B.A. in Geology

The course will teach students how to read scientific papers within geology, how to critically critic such papers, and how to
express in writing and orally their thoughts on a research paper using precise language founded in science. Students learn
how to conceptually construct viable research projects. One semester of this course is required for both B.A. and B.S. degree
majors.

END

Cosmochemistry

GEOL 01455:

Understanding the make-up of the cosmos, including that of the Solar System, requires data from the disciplines of
Astronomy and Geology. The contribution to understanding the chemistry of the cosmos from Geology comes from the
study of planetary materials. In this course we explore the geology and chemistry, including prebiotic compounds, of the
earliest time of Solar System formation through the investigation of planetary materials—meteorites and extraterrestrial
samples returned by space mission. In the course we also explore how meteorites and returned samples provide ground truth
data from remote sensing generated by observational Astronomy. Finally, some meteorites hold clues to the formation of
elements in stars in the form of presolar mineral grains, which the course will explore in detail. The course has a laboratory
component that emphasizes the practical application of the science learned in lecture. This course is open only to geology
majors.

END

Current Research in Geology

GEOL 01460:

Prerequisites: Enrollment in B.S. or B.A. in Geology

To fulfill the objectives of this course students are required to attend the School of Earth and Environment colloquium
series. This course is based on the colloquium series and students are required to write about the series through the
instructions of the faculty instructor.

END

Research Experience in Geology

GEOL 01470:

Prerequisites: Restricted to B.S. or B.A. in Geology majors only and permission of instructor

The course provides students with research experience in geology as undergraduates. Student select a geology faculty
mentor to conduct at least one semester of research. One semester of this course is required for both B.A. and B.S. degree
majors, but two semesters is encouraged for B.S. majors.

END

Advanced Research Experience in Geology

GEOL 01471:

Prerequisite: GEOL 01470

The course provides students with advanced research experience in geology as undergraduates. Student select a geology
faculty mentor to advise them on a second semester of research. While GEOL 01.470 is required for both B.A. and B.S.
degree majors, a second semesters by taking this course is encouraged for B.S. majors.

END

CMB 00690:

The Mentor or Mentor-of-Record is responsible for grading this Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory graded course. A student can
enroll in this course only once.

Thesis Research/MCBN

END

Master of Science Thesis Continuation

CMB 00699:

After completing the number of thesis credits as defined by the M.S. program requirements and completing required
coursework, students may register for Master of Science Thesis Continuation during each subsequent semester of thesis
phase. Master of Science Thesis Continuation will carry a variable credit weight of 1-9 credits (5 credits are part-time status;
9 credits are full-time status). The student’s mentor will be responsible for certifying that a student is working on his/her
thesis on a part-time or full-time basis commensurate with the number of credits they are registered for in a semester.
Students will be charged the Master of Science Thesis Continuation fee of $200 per semester for thesis continuation
regardless of the number of thesis credits for which they are registered. 

END

CMB 00702:

Molecular Biology of the Cell

Prerequisites: MBS & MPI students by permission only

This course is the cornerstone of the CMB program graduate curriculum and is taken in the Spring semester of the
student’s first year of graduate study. There are four sections to this course: I. Introduction to the cell. This section includes
evolutionary aspects of the cell, a study of small molecules, energy metabolism and biosynthesis, macromolecular structure
and function. II. Molecular genetics, including protein function, genetic mechanisms, recombinant DNA technology, the
cell nucleus, and the control of gene expression. III. Internal organization of the cell, including membrane structure,
transport mechanisms, cell signaling, cell division and the mechanisms controlling the phases of the cell-cycle. IV. Cells in
their social context, including cell junctions, cell adhesion, germ cells and fertilization, cellular mechanisms of development,
differentiation and tissue formation, the immune system and specialized tissues.

END

Experimental Design

CMB 00802:

Thesis students only

This course covers generally how experiments are designed, interpreted and critiqued in biomedical sciences. The focus is
on how research is approached, including the reasoning behind hypotheses, controls, interpretation, and presentation.
Discussions will revolve around published work and theoretical issues. The course will consist of advance reading
assignments followed by in-class discussion and several writing assignments. The goal of the course is to give students the
vocabulary and thinking skills to read biomedical research literature critically, participate constructively in peer review, and
to better approach research problems.

END

Scientific Writing

CMB 00803:

This course presents the fundamental principles of scientific writing. Topics include components of a research paper,
elements of a grant proposal, posters and power point presentations. Students will write an Abstract of a research paper and
a Specific Aims page of a grant proposal. Students will also complete frequent short homework assignments, deliver an oral
presentation, and critique/edit each other’s work. This course is required for all first-year CMB doctoral and masters
students.

END

Critical Readings in Molecular Cell Biology & Neuroscience

CMB 00804:

This course focuses on a key skill for scientists: how to effectively read and interpret scientific papers. The course takes the
format of a classroom discussion of primary scientific literature, moderated by faculty from SOM's two basic science
departments. The students will read journal articles provided to them on Blackboard and discuss these articles in class, with
an emphasis on evaluating experimental support for the paper's claims, rigor in data analysis and the use of different
methods to communicate ideas in a research manuscript.

END

Cell Culture and Stem Cells

CMB 00805:

This course will introduce the student to major theories and methods of analysis of cellular-level functions and behaviors
that underlie normal development in multicellular organisms and pathologies such as cancer and tissue aging. The first part
of the course focuses on the design and interpretation of experiments in mammalian cell culture, with a particular emphasis
on the validity of cell culture models for studying biological processes in vivo. The second part covers the fundamentals of
stem cell biology, transgenic technologies and emerging therapeutic applications of stem cells.

END

Graduate Genetics

CMB 00806:

This course covers advanced topics in genetic analysis and genetic methods. Our focus will be on the techniques and logic
common to all research subjects, from viruses to humans. Previous exposure to Genetics is helpful but not required.
Students must attend lectures, read the textbook, solve problems and read papers before each class.

END

CMB 00810:

Prerequisites: MBS & MPI students by permission only

Biomolecular Interactions

END

Antimicrobial Drugs: Mechanisms of Action & Resistance

MBS 00602:

Prerequisites: Microbiology recommended

This course covers the mechanisms of action, selectivity, and resistance to agents that are used to treat microbial
infections, including bacterial, fungal, protozoal, helminthic, and viral infections. The course does not cover clinical aspects
of Pharmacology but is focused on molecular mechanisms of action of antimicrobial agents. It is intended to complement
the Principles of Pharmacology (MBS 00612) course which is more clinically oriented. There is no substantial overlap with
other GSBS courses including Principles of Pharmacology and Microbiology. It is recommended that students complete
Microbiology (MBS 00610) and Fundamentals of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (MBS 00501) or comparable
undergraduate courses prior to taking this course.

END

Immunology

MBS 00603:

Prerequisites: MBS 00501 and MBS 00502 with minimum grade of C

Students will learn the basic concepts of the immune response and its role in human health and disease. The underlying
mechanisms that lead to immunosuppression, autoimmunity, and hypersensitivity will be explored. In addition, the role of
the immune system in cancer development and treatment will be examined. An emphasis will be placed on applying the
learned concepts to clinical case studies throughout the course.

END

Essential Neuroscience

MBS 00606:

This course focuses on the basic molecular and biochemical aspects of neuronal physiology, emphasizing mechanisms that
underlie the major classes of neurological disorders. Students will be provided with a fundamental understanding of the gross
anatomy and general functions of the central nervous system at the cellular and molecular levels. The course will introduce
essential concepts and facts on how neuronal cells communicate with each other, with examples of how neurotransmitter
dysregulation and metabolic malfunction lead to the development of mental disorders. The course instructors are research
scientists who have expertise in clinical neuroscience and translational research. There will be invited speakers who
specialize in various neurological and psychiatric diseases with complex or heterogeneous etiology, including Alzheimer's
Disease, Parkinson's Disease, White Matter Disease, Neuroinflammation and HIV-associated Neurorocognitive Disorders,
Autism & Pharmacotherapy of Drug Addiction and Alcohol Abuse. The major goals of the course will be to introduce
Master students to translational neuroscience and to the pivotal role that neuroscience plays in understanding and
treatment of human brain diseases. Lectures will be supplemented with handouts, references and PowerPoint presentations.

END

Mechanisms of Disease

MBS 00609:

Prerequisites: MBS 00501 and MBS 00502 ("C" grade or better in each course)

This course will provide students exposure to the pathology of major organ systems. *This course is only open to students
in the Histopathology and Anatomical Sciences programs.*

END

Microbiology

MBS 00610:

This is an introductory Microbiology course taken in the Fall Semester of the student’s first or second year of graduate
study. It strikes an appropriate balance between microbiological fundamentals and medical/research applications. It also
provides a foundation in microbiology for those students planning to pursue advanced degrees. There are three sections to
this course: I. Fundamentals of Microbiology. This section includes a brief history, methods used to observe
microorganisms, and a study of microbial cell anatomy, metabolism, growth and genetics. II. A survey of the Microbial
World, including classifications of Eukaryotes, Prokaryotes, Viruses, Viriods, and Prions. III. Interaction between the
Microbe and host, including principle of disease and epidemiology, mechanisms of pathogenicity, innate and adaptive
immunity, immunology and antimicrobial drugs. Although this course assumes no previous study of biology chemistry, a
basic understanding of DNA, RNA, and proteins is recommended.

END

Pathophysiology of the Cardiovascular System

MBS 00611:

Prerequisites: MBS 00503 ("C" grade or better)

Cardiovascular disease remains the number one killer in the United States. Despite the current successes in the treatment
of acute myocardial infarction, the incidence of heart failure continues to increase as the population ages. This course will
explore the underlying causes of heart disease and other cardiovascular diseases with an emphasis on normal physiology,
pathophysiologic changes and current controversies. The course will cover selected topics of cardiovascular disease
including: common cardiac arrhythmias, ischemic heart disease, acute coronary syndromes, atherosclerosis, hypertension,
diseases of the peripheral vasculature and heart failure. The purpose of this course is to examine the underlying causes and
the most current thinking as it relates to cardiovascular disease. The course will involve both lecture presentation and
discussion of current literature.

END

Principles of Pharmacology

MBS 00612:

The modern discipline of pharmacology involves understanding how medications are used in the prevention, diagnosis and
treatment of human diseases. The emphasis of this course is on mechanisms of drug action, therapeutic applications,
adverse effects, contraindications and drug interactions. The overall mission of the course will be to introduce students to
the basic principles of pharmacology and to familiarize them with classes of drugs and examples of specific drugs used
frequently in the clinical setting.

END

Topics in Molecular Pathology & Immunology

MPI 00504:

This course provides the student with a factual understanding of key host/pathogen elements related to the development
of human disease, in an introductory manner. The course will cover major human pathogens and their disease-causing
mechanisms (Microbiology). In addition, the human immune system is presented in the context of host-defense against
infectious and malignant disease (Immunology). Mechanisms of tumorigenesis and metastasis are explored (Cancer), as are
the metabolic mechanisms underpinning diabetes, obesity and related disorders (Metabolic Diseases). Finally, shorter
elements describe the creation, validation and standardization of new molecular diagnostic tools (Diagnostics); the critical
(statistical) evaluation of experimental data (Statistics); important elements of high-throughput screening and early stage
drug discovery (Drug Discovery); an introduction to the discovery, mechanism of action, and resistance to antimicrobial
agents (Antimicrobial Agents); as well as a discussion of the genetics of cancer and other diseases (Medical Genetics). Upon
completion of the course, students will have gained a broad overview of the theoretic and practical aspects of the subjects
that underlie the laboratory courses they may take in the future.

END

Techniques in Molecular Diagnostics

MPI 00601:

This course is designed to allow students to master techniques routinely used in molecular diagnostics. Students will
develop and apply these techniques in a laboratory-based setting. Methods include DNA and RNA isolation and
quantification, protein expression, purification, and analysis, molecular cloning methods, diagnostic methods used for
genetic testing, culture methods for growth of bacteria, yeast, and viruses, microscopic methods for diagnostic testing, etc.
Students will select two techniques during the course to perform and master. The student will be required to write a short
4-5 page NIH type introduction on each method. In addition, the student will give an oral presentation on one of the
techniques mastered. Upon completion of this course students will have acquired a basic mastery of a subset of methods
routinely used in the molecular diagnoses of disease.

END

Introduction to Healthcare in Sports Medicine

ATR 00105:

This course focuses on the healthcare team and delivery systems. Students will learn about legal responsibilities, ethical
issues, safety, infection control, communication, interpersonal behaviors, wellness, and disease as it pertains to Sports
Medicine and providing optimal healthcare.

END

Foundations in Sports Medicine

ATR 00210:

Prerequisites: ATR 00105

This is the first course in a series that will provide students with foundational knowledge that will be useful in preparing
them to apply to the Athletic Training Program. This course will teach students medical terminology, normal and
pathological movement patterns, common medical emergencies, musculoskeletal anatomy and the psychological effects of
injury and rehabilitation.

END

Pathology and Evaluation of Orthopedic Injuries II

ATR 00220:

Prerequisites: (ATR 00219 or PHED 35219) Corequisites: ATR 00239

This course provides an examination of the etiology, epidemiology, pathology and assessment of injuries and illnesses to
the upper extremity, head, axial skeleton, chest, and thorax. Structural, functional and surface anatomy will be reviewed. In
addition to didactic classroom time, students are also instructed, given time to practice and evaluated on pertinent athletic
training psychomotor competencies and clinical proficiencies within a practical laboratory experience. There is an
observational field experience associated with this class.

END

Foundations in Sports Medicine II

ATR 00339:

Prerequisites: ATR 00210

This is the second course in a series that will provide students with foundational knowledge that will be useful in preparing
them to apply to the Athletic Training Program. This course will teach students principles of a systematic clinical
evaluation, nutrition and its role in tissue healing, injury prevention and performance optimization, and therapeutic
interventions.

END

Foundations in Sports Medicine III

ATR 00340:

Prerequisites: ATR 00339

This is the third course in a series that will provide students with foundational knowledge that will be useful in preparing
them to apply to the Athletic Training Program. This course will teach students principles of prophylactic strapping and
bracing, research methodology, and basic pharmacology. It will also cover the professional and dispositional requirements of
the Professional Preparation component of the Athletic Training Program.

END

ATR 00341:

Clinical Techniques in Athletic Training IV

Prerequisites: (ATR 00340 or PHED 35340) Corequisites: ATR 00361

This course, designed for second semester seniors, will review and evaluate clinical proficiencies previously discussed in
General Medical Conditions and Pharmacology and related topics relevant to previous course work. Students meet once per
week in the Athletic Training Laboratory to practice and discuss topics pertinent to their clinical assignment. The clinical
assignment enables students to develop and assimilate patient care skills under the direct supervision of a certified athletic
trainer and/or approved clinical instructor within the athletic training room, exposure to intercollegiate athletics and/or at
approved affiliated sites.

END

Applied Biomechanics

ATR 00347:

Prerequisites: HES 00346 with minimum grade of C- Athletic Training students must earn minimum grade of C.

This course provides students with a foundation in the biomechanical concepts and applications that describe and govern
human movement. Topics of the course will include, but are not limited to: friction, linear and angular motion, tissue
mechanical properties, conservation of energy, work and power, fluid mechanics, stability and center of gravity, walking and
running gait analysis. Topics are analyzed quantitatively through the use of modern biomechanical analyses including motion
capture, electromyography, and force plates.

END

Residency in Athletic Training I

ATR 00358:

Prerequisites: (ATR 00220 or PHED 35220) and acceptance in the Professional Phase of the Athletic Training Education program
Corequisites: ATR 00338

This clinical education course, designed for first semester juniors, will review and evaluate, within a clinical assignment,
those clinical proficiencies discussed in previous and concurrent course work using a learning-over-time model. The clinical
assignment enables students to develop and assimilate patient care skills under the direct supervision of a certified athletic
trainer and/or approved clinical instructor within the athletic training room, exposure to intercollegiate athletics and/or at
approved affiliated sites. During this course, the student will be formally evaluated by an Approved Clinical Instructor only.
This course must be takend and successfully completed in conjunction with ATR 00338 Clinical Techniques in Athletic
Training I before a student may continue to matriculate through the Athletic Training Education Program.

END

Residency in Athletic Training II

ATR 00359:

Prerequisites: (ATR 00338 or PHED 35338) and (ATR 00358 or PHED 35358) Corequisites: ATR 00339

This clinical education course, designed for second semester juniors, will review and evaluate, within a clinical setting,
those clinical proficiencies discussed in previous and concurrent course work using a learning-over-time model. The clinical
assignment enables students to develop and assimilate patient care skills under the direct supervision of a certified athletic
trainer and/or approved clinical instructor within the athletic training room, exposure to intercollegiate athletics and/or at
approved affiliated sites. During this course, the student will be formally evaluated by an Approved Clinical Instructor only.
This course must be taken and successfully completed in conjuction with ATR 00339 Clinical Techniques in Athletic
Training II before a student may continue matriculating through the Athletic Training Education Program.

END

Residency in Athletic Training III

ATR 00360:

Prerequisites: (ATR 00339 or PHED 35339) and (ATR 00359 or PHED 35359) Corequisites: ATR 00340

This clinical education course, designed for first semester seniors, will review and evaluate, within a clinical setting, those
clinical proficiencies discussed in previous and concurrent course work using a learning-over-time model. The clinical
assignment enables students to develop and assimilate patient care skills under the direct supervision of a certified athletic
trainer and/or approved clinical instructor within the athletic training room, exposure to intercollegiate athletics and/or at
approved affiliated sites. During this course, the student will be formally evaluated by an Approved Clinical Instructor only.
This course must be taken and successfully completed in conjuction with ATR 00340 Clinical Techniques in Athletic
Training III before a student may continue matriculating through the Athletic Training Education Program.

END

Residency in Athletic Training IV

ATR 00361:

Prerequisites: (ATR 00340 or PHED 35340) and (ATR 00360 or PHED 35360) Corequisites: ATR 00341

This clinical education course, designed for second semester seniors, will review and evaluate, within a clinical setting,
those clinical proficiencies discussed in previous and concurrent course work using a learning-over-time model. The clinical
assignment enables students to develop and assimilate patient care skills under the direct supervision of a certified athletic
trainer and/or approved clinical instructor within the athletic training room, exposure to intercollegiate athletics and/or at
approved affiliated sites. During this course, the student will be formally evaluated by an Approved Clinical Instructor only.
This course must be taken and successfully completed in conjuction with ATR 00341 Clinical Techniques in Athletic
Training III before a student may continue matriculating through the Athletic Training Education Program.

END

Organization & Administration in Athletic Training

ATR 00405:

Prerequisites: (ATR 00339 or PHED 35339)

This lecture/laboratory course is designed to meet the entry level competencies for the athletic training student in the area
of organization and administration of athletic training. It covers liability, budgeting, athletic training facility design,
insurance, administration of medical record keeping systems, data tabulation and interpretation, emergency transportation
systems, athletic training facility management, impact of state and national governing body regulations, athletic injury
insurance administration and communication, conflict resolution and mediation.
The senior level course is designed to meet educational competencies in pharmacology and general medicine for the
undergraduate athletic training student. This course will focus on issues in pharmacology and general medicine pertinent to
the allied health profession of athletic training. Issues such as the drug approval process, side effects of medications, general
medical evaluation will be explored during this course,. There is a general medical clinical field experience with the athletic
raining programs medical director associated with this course.

END

Senior Seminar in Athletic Training

ATR 00430:

Prerequisites: (ATR 00340 or PHED 35340)

This senior seminar is an examination of the individual's responsibility to promote athletic training as a profession, remain
abreast of current theory and practice, disseminate health and athletic training information, and to enhance the professional
growth of self and others.

END

Therapeutic Modalities in Athletic Training - Laboratory Experiences

ATR 00447:

Prerequisites: (ATR 00220 or PHED 35220) Corequisites: ATR 00475

This laboratory course is designed to teach teh psychomotor and clinical proficiency skills necessary to develop
psychomotor skills relevant to the use of Therapeutic Modalities. This laboratory course must be taken and successfully
completed in conjuction with Therapeutic Modalities in Athletic Training before a student may continue matriculating
through the Athletic Training Education Program.

END

Therapeutic Modalities for Athletic Training

ATR 00475:

Prerequisites: (ATR 00220 or PHED 35220) and (ATR 00329 or PHED 35239) Corequisites: ATR 00447

This course focuses on the cognitive, affective and psychomotor competencies involved in developing appropriate
therapeutic modality programs for the injured person. This course uses current research to discuss the theory and clinical
applications of all potential modalities used in the athletic training room. This course implements a problem-solving
approach for the return of functional integrity to the injured person through the use of therapeutic modalities. A laboratory
experience is part of this class.

END

Therapeutic Exercises in Athletic Training - Laboratory Experiences

ATR 00476:

Prerequisites: (ATR 00475 or PHED 35475) Corequisites: ATR 00478

This laboratory course is designed to teach the psychomotor and lcinical proficiency skills necessary to develop
psychomotor skills relevant to the use of Therapeutic Excercies. This laboratory course must be taken and successfully
copleted in conjunction with Terapeutic Excercies in Athletic Training before a student may continue matriculating
through the athletic Training Education Program.

END

Psychosocial Aspects of Physical Activity

ATR 00477:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 and (HES 00370 or PSY 05320)

Psychosocial Aspects of Physical Activity (ATR00477) course is designed for students in the Psychology of Sport and
Exercise Minor and Certificate of Undergraduate Study (CUGS) Program. The course draws upon theories, empirical
studies, and practical applications to help people discover the importance and significance of psychosocial aspects in
physical activity. This course will provide a theoretical foundation for exploring the relationship/interaction between
biology (brain, body systems), psychology (cognitions, emotions, and behaviors), and social factors (relationships, culture,
health policy) within the reviewed topic areas. Topics covered in this course include but are not limited to: the
biopsychosocial model, theories and techniques of interpersonal and cross-cultural communication, eating disorders and
disordered eating, substance abuse/addiction, sleep, stress, psychosocial distress, trauma (including Trauma Informed Care),
mental health concepts, suicide and self-harm, sociocultural issues, abuse and/or neglect, social support systems, response to
injury and rehabilitation, psychosocial aspects of pain, psychosocial and “complementary therapies” such as meditation,
yoga, massage, and acupuncture This course will also demand critical thinking of the research, assigned readings, and articles
that support or contradict a certain theoretical perspective/viewpoint.

END

Therapeutic Exercises in Athletic Training

ATR 00478:

Prerequisites: (ATR 00475 or PHED 35475) and (ATR 00447 or PHED 35447) Corequisites: ATR 00476

This course covers the cognitive, affective and psychomotor competencies involved in developing appropriate
rehabilitation exercise protocols for the injured person. This course uses current research to discuss the physiological and
biomechanical concepts involved in the clinical practice of rehabilitation. This course implements a holistic and
problem-solving approach for the return of functional integrity to the injured person. A laboratory experience is part of this
class.

END

Pharmacology and General Medicine in Athletic Training

ATR 00479:

Prerequisites: (ATR 00478 or PHED 35478)

This senior level course is designed to meet educational competencies in pharmacology and general medication for the
undergraduate athletic training student. The course will focus on issues in pharmacology and general medicine pertinent to
the allied health profession of athletic training. Issues such as the drug approval process, side effects of medications, general
medical evaluation will be explored during this course. There is a general medical clinical field experience with the athletic
training program's medical director associated with this course.

END

Principles in Evidence-based Practice

ATR 00505:

Prerequisites: Acceptance into the Athletic Training Program

This course addresses the role of research in professional Athletic Training practice including conduct of research,
research sources utilization and dissemination, methodology, data analysis and principles and models of evidence-based
practice.

END

Cadaver Anatomy

ATR 00510:

Prerequisites: Acceptance into the Athletic Training Program

This course offers students the opportunity to identify various structures on cadaver specimens that are related to neuro
and musculoskeletal structures and pathologies of the human body.

END

Management of Medical Emergencies

ATR 00511:

Prerequisites: Acceptance into the Athletic Training Program

This is a lecture and laboratory course that provides a comprehensive approach to the identification of risk factors,
preparation of emergency action plans, and recognition and care of emergency medical conditions including those that may
lead to sudden death. Students will gain CPR Certification upon successful completion of curricular requirements.

END

Clinical Assessment I

ATR 00519:

Prerequisites: In good standing with the Athletic Training Program

This course discusses prevention, assessment, diagnosis, and treatment approaches for patients with musculoskeletai
pathologies as it relates to the lower extremity and lumbar spine.

END

Clinical Assessment II

ATR 00520:

Prerequisites: ATR 00519

This course discusses prevention, assessment, diagnosis, and treatment approaches for patients with musculoskeletal
pathologies as it relates to the head, upper extremity, cervical and thoracic spine.

END

Clinical Assessment III

ATR 00521:

Prerequisites: ATR 00520

This course discusses knowledge, skills and abilities associated with the prevention, assessment, diagnosis, and treatment
approaches for patients with a variety of medical conditions. Students will practice the clinical skills necessary to provide
appropriate patient care within this course.

END

Injury Risk Management to Enhance Human Performance

ATR 00524:

Prerequisites: In good standing with the Athletic Training Program

This course will provide students with the knowledge, skills and abilities that relate to health care systems, injury
prevention, prophylactic strapping & bracing, and durable medical equipment. This course will also teach students how to
develop assessment plans that detect poor movement strategies and then implement corrective intervention programs to
improve movement patterns that will reduce injury risk and maximize performance.

END

Healthcare Management & Quality Improvement

ATR 00526:

Prerequisites: ATR 00531

This course will provide students with the concepts and issues related to healthcare management and quality improvement
within the clinical setting to enhance patient care. Students will learn the knowledge, skills and abilities in the areas of, but
not limited to, healthcare informatics, quality improvement, finance and reimbursement, managed care, professional and
governmental regulations, diversity within the workplace, and professional responsibility. These topics will culminate into
developing healthcare management strategies using qualitative and quantitative outcomes measures, developing healthcare
leadership & communication skills, self-assessment and facility management to advocate best clinical practice for all
stakeholders involved in patient care.

END

Pharmacology

ATR 00530:

Prerequisites: ATR 00533

This course will teach students the knowledge, skills and abilities needed to understand basic principles of pharmacology,
pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. Students will also learn the indications, contraindications, dosing, interactions
and adverse reactions of pharmacological agents in order to educate patients about medication administration while
managing their condition. This course is also designed to educate students how to administer medications using the
appropriate route upon the order of a prescribing physician and in accordance with governing pharmacological regulations.

END

Therapeutic Interventions I

ATR 00531:

Prerequisites: ATR 00519 and ATR 00524

This course will use an evidence-based approach to teach students the knowledge, skills and abilities to use physical agents
as a component in the development and implementation of plans of care designed to address a patient's impairments,
limitations and restrictions following injuries requiring both surgical and non-surgical therapeutic interventions. These
physical agents include but may not be limited to cryotherapy, thermotherapy, ultrasound therapy, electrical therapy,
diathermy, intermittent compression, traction, LASER, massage and manual therapies. Additionally, students will be taught
how to use patient-oriented and clinician-oriented outcomes to develop and adjust their plans of care to provide the most
effective healthcare.

END

Therapeutic Interventions II

ATR 00533:

Prerequisites: ATR 00531

This course will use an evidence-based approach to teach students the knowledge, skills and abilities to use rehabilitation
& reconditioning components in the development and implementation of plans of care designed to address a patient's
impairments, limitations and restrictions following injury. These concepts include but may not be limited to strength,
endurance power, restoration of flexibility and range of motion, activity specific conditioning, proprioception and balance,
and agility. Additionally, students will continue to use patient-oriented and clinician-oriented outcomes to develop and
adjust their plans of care to provide the most effective healthcare.

END

Behavioral Health

ATR 00535:

Prerequisites: ATR 00526

This course teaches the knowledge, skills and abilities needed for the Athletic Trainer to appropriately develop and
implement policies to identify patients with a behavioral health crisis (e.g., sociocultural, mental, emotional and/or physical)
and for referral to qualified providers. This course will also address the role of cultural competence among athletic trainers,
their patients, and other healthcare providers involved in developing policy, referral and plans of care that promote high
quality healthcare.

END

Residency in Athletic Training I

ATR 00537:

Prerequisites: ATR 00519

This supervised clinical experience course provides students with clinical practice opportunities. This course emphasizes
continuum of care, including the use of evidence-based practice, cultural competence, inter-professional practice,
communication, quality improvement, ethical decision- making, documentation, patient-centered care and professionalism.

END

Residency in Athletic Training II

ATR 00538:

Prerequisites: ATR 00520

This clinical experience course continues to provide students with clinical practice opportunities using increased
supervised clinical decision-making autonomy. This course also continues to emphasize continuum of care, including the use
of evidence-based practice, cultural competence, inter-professional practice, communication, quality improvement, ethical
decision- making, documentation, patient-centered care and professionalism.

END

Fellowship in Athletic Training I

ATR 00540:

Prerequisites: ATR 00539

This clinical course will allow students to have an immersive experience in which to practice clinical skills under supervised
clinical decision- making autonomy. This course emphasizes continuum of care, including the use of evidence-based
practice, cultural competence, inter-professional practice, communication, quality improvement, ethical decision- making,
documentation, patient-centered care and professionalism.

END

Fellowship in Athletic Training II

ATR 00541:

Prerequisites: ATR 00540

This course is the culmination of all clinical experiences. Students practice clinical skills during a full semester of
supervised immersive clinical education experiences with the greatest amount of supervised autonomy. This course
emphasizes continuum of care, including the use of evidence-based practice, cultural competence, inter-professional
practice, communication, quality improvement, ethical decision- making, documentation, patient-­centered care and
professionalism.

END

Capstone in Clinical Reasoning I

ATR 00560:

Prerequisites: ATR 00535

This course will provide the student, under the guidance of their advisor, the opportunity to develop a clinical/research
question and methodology, data analysis and interpretation that leads to a research project that will enhance the Athletic
Training profession. In addition, this course will be used to assess the student's competence to practice Athletic Training.
Course will include a Master's Comprehensive Exam to assess Athletic Training skills.

END

Capstone in Clinical Reasoning II

ATR 00561:

Prerequisites: ATR 00560

This course is a continuation of ATR00560 Capstone in Clinical Reasoning I. The student will prepare their research
project for a culminating presentation in preparation for submission to a scholarly journal.

END

Inter-professional Teamwork in Healthcare

HCNV 07401:

This seminar course will provide students from various healthcare disciplines with opportunities to work together to
develop skills needed to engage in inter-professional collaborative practice. Students will complete pre-work online and then
attend meetings with other healthcare disciplines to develop care plans for patient cases. Specific, but not limited to, areas
of study include ethics for inter-professional practice, roles and responsibilities of healthcare providers, inter-professional
communication strategies and developing quality healthcare teams to enhance patient outcomes.

END

Teaching Concepts of Driver Education

HES 00100:

Prerequisites: (ATR 00235 or PHED 35235) and (HPE 00325 or HLTH 37325) or (ATR 00235 or PHED 35235) and (HPE 00326 or
HLTH 37326)

The course is designed for individuals seeking New Jersey Driver Education teacher endorsement. The content includes
learning to teach motor vehicle operation, driving environment and the student development of teaching techniques
emphasizing safety, risk perception, and decision-making prcesses applied in a vehicle. Learning how to instruct others in
performing behind-the-wheel driving will be scheduled outside of class time.

END

Foundations of Exercise Science

HES 00105:

This course introduces students to the Exercise Science major. Students will thoroughly understand the policies and
procedures within the major, careers in the field of exercise science, become familiar with professional organizations,
develop resume writing and interview skills, participate in professional development and site visit experiences, be exposed to
research opportunities, along with preparation for graduate school. Students will assess career goals and create a plan to
develop principles and characteristics that will improve their opportunities for success.

END

Adventure and Experiential Learning

HES 00109:

This course is designed to provide experiences to promote adventure and experiential learning. Students will be introduced
to skills and activities that promote emotional, social, mental and physical perspicacity and awareness. The students within
the class will work collaboratively in a variety of activities including initiatives, and low and high elements. The class requires
active participation and will use a high ropes course.

END

Safety First Aid Basic Understanding of Athletic Injuries

HES 00116:

Prerequisites: Acceptance into one of the following programs; Athletic Training, Health Promotion and Fitness Management, or
Health and Physical Education Teacher Certification.

This course is designed for the individual who is interested in gaining CPR and First Aid certification and a basic
understanding of athletic injuries. The first part of this class will allow students to understand and demonstrate appropriate
techniques in performing American Red Cross Community CPR and First Aid techniques required for certification. The
second component of the class will enable students to understand basic concepts in athletic injury: anatomy, recognition,
and basic care.

END

Essentials of Strength Training

HES 00201:

Prerequisites: BIOL 10210 and BIOL10212

Opportunity is provided for an individual study of developing and practicing safe and effective resistance training programs
based on the fundamentals of anatomy, physiology and biomechanics. Students will learn basic training principles,
appropriate exercise selection, exercise technique and programming while applying these skills in a gym setting. Students
will professionally train each other using a variety of equipment gaining practice and confidence when training individuals.

END

Medical Terminology

HES 00202:

This course is designed to assist in mastery of the terms, words, phrases, and symbols that describe the human body in its
various states of health and disease, as well as the proper anatomical terms for each of the body parts. Terminology regarding
diagnosis, surgical procedures, and pharmacological preparations will be presented. The depth and score of this course will
meet the needs of students in healthcare and allied health-related fields.

END

Adventure Processing and Facilitation

HES 00209:

Prerequisites: HES 00109

This course examines the historical background and philosophical theories of Adventure Education. From this base,
students will learn the skills to facilitate and process adventure-oriented activities in order to build intrapersonal and
interpersonal skills. Students will learn Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) of the elements so they may lead future
adventure programming.

END

Structure and Function of the Human Body I

HES 00241:

Prerequisites: Acceptance into one of the following programs; Athletic Training, Health Promotion and Fitness Management, or Health
and Physical Education Teacher Certification

This course investigates basic anatomical and physiological concepts of the human body. It includes cellular structure and
function, metabolism, and the skeletal, nervous, muscular, circulatory and respiratory systems.

END

Structure and Function of the Human Body II

HES 00242:

Prerequistie(s): (HES 00241 or PHED 35241) and acceptance into on of the following programs; Athletic Training,Health Promotion
and Fitness Management, or Health andPhysical Education Teacher Certification.
This course continues the study of the human body begun in HES 00241. It investigates the urinary, endocrine,
reproductive, digestive and integumentary systems.

END

Motor Control and Learning

HES 00243:

Prerequisites: C- or higher in BIOL 10210 and BIOL 10212

This course provides a thorough understanding of motor control and motor learning of human movement. Motor control
deficiencies in people with neurological diseases will also be covered. Laboratory activities will be used to support the
information learned in class.

END

Movement and Meaning in Sports

HES 00271:

This course helps students understand themselves and how they relate physically to their environment. Through
movement students discover, understand, control and adjust to their environment and gain an understanding of space, time
and force. The course discusses exercise and sport forms. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Technology and Assessment of Health and Exercise Science

HES 00272:

Prerequisites: Acceptance into one of the following programs; Athletic Training, Health Promotion and Fitness Management, or Health
and Physical Education Teacher Certification

This course will prepare students in the Department of Health and Exercise Science to use computers and technology for
organizing information, amplifying presentation, developing written documents, assessing client/students, gathering
information, and completing research. Students will evaluate software, use peripheral devices, explore internet applications,
and use non-computer media applications as they apply to their discipline. An introduction to simple statistical designs will
also be a component of this course.

END

Research Methods in Health and Exercise Science

HES 00301:

Prerequisites: STAT 02100

The course details design and application of research methodology that considers the cognitive, affective, and
psychomotor performance as they relate to health and human performance. Published research, review of literature,
methodology, research skills, scientific writing, and the interpretation of published research in the discipline will be
included.

END

Wilderness First Responder

HES 00309:

During disaster wilderness or outdoor situations, training in wilderness medicine is essential. Wilderness First Responder
(WFR) takes a thorough examination of the skills needed to assess and respond to emergencies. The course uses a hands-on
approach in which students are trained to react competently in the kind of emergencies they may encounter. Many
scenarios will be used so students have opportunity to critically think about injuries or illness. The course leads to
Wilderness First Responder (WFR) certification upon successfully passing the WFR exam.

END

HES 00329:

Laboratory in Personal Training Techniques

Prerequisites: HES 00345 OR HES 00349, both with minimum grade of C-

This course prepares the student with an exercise science background to work successfully as a personal fitness trainer for
individual clients. During this highly experiential learning course, students will develop their ability to combine their
exercise science knowledge, counseling and educational skills, and fitness techniques to prescribe exercise for a variety of
populations. Upon successfully completing this course, students will be prepared to qualify for national certifications in
personal training.

END

Kinesiology

HES 00343:

Prerequisites: (BIOL 10210 and BIOL 10212) or (HES 00241 or PHED 35241) and (HES 00242 or PHED 35242), all with a grade
of C- or higher.

Kinesiology, the study of human movement, integrates the sciences of anatomy, physiology and physics as they contribute
to developing an appreciation for the art of movement. Opportunity is given for an individual study of a movement pattern
with emphasis on the application of the mechanical principles of motion.

END

Exercise Physiology (without lab)

HES 00344:

Prerequisites: (BIOL 10210 and BIOL 10212) or (HES 00241 or PHED 35241) and (HES 00242 or PHED 35242), all with a grade
of C- or higher.

A course in applied anatomy and physiology, this course studies the interrelationship of exercise and physiology. This
course also covers the functions of the human body under the stress of physical activity.

END

Exercise Physiology (with lab)

HES 00345:

Prerequisites: (HES 00241 and HES 00242) or (BIOL 10210 and BIOL 10212), all with a grade of C- or higher.

A course in applied anatomy and physiology, this course studies the interrelationship of exercise and physiology. This
course also covers the functions of the human body under the stress of physical activity.

END

Introduction to Biomechanics

HES 00346:

Prerequisites: (BIOL 10210 and BIOL 10212) or (HES 00241 or PHED 35241 and (HES 00242 or PHED 35242), all with a grade of
C- or higher.

This course specifically prepares students with the knowledge and skills essential for working in clinical settings related to
health and healthcare professions. It integrates the sciences of anatomy, physiology and physics as they contribute to
developing the knowledge and skills pertinent to understanding human motion from a mechanical perspective. An
introduction to biomechanical instrumentation (e.g., motion capture, force plates, etc) will provide practical applications to
address: functional movement assessment, kinetic and kinematic qualities of movement, gait analysis for healthy
populations and selected pathological conditions, and corrective exercises for proper human movement.

END

Wellness Programming for Children Seminar

HES 00347:

Prerequisites: Earn a grade of C- or higher in HPW 00340

This seminar prepares students who are not in a teacher preparation program to design and implement wellness programs
and initiatives for children and adolescents using age-appropriate strategies and materials. Students will apply the knowledge
and skills they have learned about behavior change and program planning to non-school settings that serve children and
adolescents.

END

Human Disease and Epidemiology in Health and Exercise Science

HES 00348:

Prerequisites: C- or higher in HES 00345 OR HES 00349, both with minimum grade of C-

This course examines the etiology, pathophysiology and epidemiology of diseases and conditions that are often seen by
health and fitness professionals working with clients in human performance and exercise science settings. Included are
cardiovascular disease, hypertension, asthma, Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes mellitus, overweight and obesity, osteoarthritis,
rheumatoid arthritis, low back pain syndrome and cancer. In addition, concerns specific to children, the elderly and in
pregnancy are also addressed.

END

Exercise Physiology for the Health Care Professions

HES 00349:

Prerequisites: (HES 00241 and HES 00242) or (BIOL 10210 and BIOL 10212), all with a grade of C- or higher.

The course specifically prepares students with the knowledge and skills essential for working in clinical settings related to
health and healthcare professions. It intricately examines the interrelationship between physical activity and the
consequential human physiological response. It prepares students to assess the physiology of the human body during acute
responses and chronic adaptations to exercise and physical activity as a result of the training and conditioning process.
Laboratory experiences will allow students to apply theoretical concepts to the health and health care professions in the
areas of cardiovascular, metabolic, neuromuscular, pulmonary diseases, body composition, and exercise in thermal stress
environments.

END

Advanced Lifesaving/Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation

HES 00373:

This course is for advanced swimmers who wish to learn the skills and techniques necessary to become qualified lifeguards.
This course covers swimming and rescue skills, personal safety skills, lifeguard techniques, cardiopulmonary resuscitation
skills and knowledge, and management techniques for aquatic environments. Upon successful completion of the course the
student will receive the American National Red Cross Certificate in Basic Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and in Advanced
Lifesaving. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Coaching Team Sports (Non-Majors)

HES 00374:

This course develops a sound philosophy in team sports for interscholastic programs in junior and senior high schools. This
course presents skills, techniques, theory, rules, strategy and methods through laboratory, classroom experiences and
audiovisual aids. This course may not be offered annually.

END

HES 00401:

Exercise Prescription

Prerequisites: HES 00345 OR HES 00349 with a minimum grade of C-

This course provides students with the knowledge and practical experience in exercise testing and prescription. It enables
students to establish scientific foundations of exercise testing and prescription, identify risk factors for disease and
prescribe exercise programs based on exercise test results and personal limitations. Practical experiences are provided for
testing subjects in the laboratory. The course prepares students for professional exercise certifications.

END

EKG Interpretation and Basic Pharmacology in Health and Exercise Science

HES 00402:

Prerequisites: HES 00401 with minimum grade of C-

This course provides a thorough understanding of EKG interpretation and basic pharmacology related to cardiac,
pulmonary, and diabetic conditions for professionals in human performance and exercise science fields. Video streaming of
EKG rhythms will provide students with practical experience. Case studies will be used to understand how medications are
used to treat a variety of health issues and the influence of these medications on exercise prescription.

END

Adventure Programming

HES 00409:

Prerequisites: HES 00109 and HES 00209 and HES 00309

This is an advanced course examining the role of an adventure course manager or outdoor leader. The class focuses on
purposeful design, risk management, and safety of adventure programming. There will be managed adventure course learn to be scenarios where skills, 
environmentally-responsible wilderness users. Finally, students will learn to organize and lead excursions.

END

Exercise for Special Populations

HES 00412:

Prerequisites: HES 00345 OR HES 00349 with minimum grade of C-

This course provides a study of exercise considerations for those with disease and special conditions. It covers the basic
concepts of the physiologic effects of exercise and the application of these concepts to special cases. Cases included are
respiratory and cardiovascular diseases, hypertension, obesity, diabetes, arthritis, osteoporosis, pregnancy,
children/adolescents, and the elderly. In addition, students will learn exercise testing modifications and specific exercise
prescriptions and the associated modifications.

END

Senior Seminar in Exercise Science

HES 00413:

Prerequisites: C- or higher in HES 00401

This application-oriented course is designed to review and assess the students’ knowledge and skills which were developed
throughout the Exercise Science program. Students will progress through a series of online seminars reviewing the key
concepts and skills learned in the program that are necessary for a career in the field of Exercise Science. In addition,
students will work in group settings to continue to practice and develop key skills necessary for their career.

END

Nutrition for Fitness

HES 00415:

Prerequisites: (NUT 00200 OR INAR 06200) AND (BIOL 10210 OR HES 00241) AND (BIOL 10212 OR HES 00242) all with a
grade of C- or higher.

This advanced nutrition course explores the relationship between nutrition, physical fitness, performance and disease
prevention. Specific topics include nutrition fraud, supplementation, ergogenic aids, diet planning for athletes and the
relationship between nutrition and chronic diseases such as cancer and heart disease. In addition, students continue to
develop their skills as nutrition counselors and educators.

END

Principles of Coaching

HES 00456:

Emphasizes the development of a sound coaching philosophy. Includes aspects related to team organization, supervision,
equipment control and its administration and community ethics. Attention will be given to the sociology and psychology of
sport.

END

Water Safety Instructor

HES 00473:

This course covers the American National Red Cross standardized program of skill proficiency, teaching methodologies,
principles of class organization, safety factors in teaching swimming and practice teaching experiences. The course is for
advanced swimmers who are interested in learning to teach swimming and water safety. Upon successful completion of this
course students receive the American National Red Cross Certificate as a Water Safety Instructor. This course may not be
offered annually.

END

HES 00480:

This course, an elective course for all students, assists students to develop and enhance "a worthy use of leisure" by
participation in school and community recreation as well as leisure service programs and activities.

Trends in School and Community Recreation

END

Senior Internship in Health and Exercise Science

HES 00483:

Prerequisites: HPW 00430 OR HES 00413 with minimum grades of C-

Students complete 400 hours of supervised field experience enabling them to gain practical experience in an environment
focused on Health Promotion, Exercise Physiology, Community Health or other, related field. Placements are made in
agencies selected on the basis of student's goals, interests, and program specialization. The site will provide experiences that
build on the skills, knowledge, and dispositions acquired during coursework and related professional experiences.

END

Senior Internship in Exercise Science

HES 00484:

Prerequisites: HES 00413 with a C- or higher

Students complete 250 hours of supervised field experience enabling them to gain practical experience in an environment
focused on Exercise Science or other, related field. Placements are made in agencies selected on the basis of student's goals,
interests, and program specialization. The site will provide experiences that build on the skills, knowledge, and dispositions
acquired during coursework and related professional experiences. 6 Credit hours

END

Exercise Science Learning Assistant

HES 00490:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

As Learning Assistants, students will develop educational experiences in facilitating active learning techniques in a
classroom with an Exercise Science faculty. Being a Learning Assistant will enhance a student's development and mastery of
Exercise Science content as a result of facilitating student group interactions and activities that encourage engagement.
Students will meet weekly to develop teaching competencies that better prepare students for future education endeavors
like teaching and/or graduate assistantships, or college instructors in their future careers.

END

Seminar in Global Health Perspectives

HIST 00490:

Prerequisites: HES 00301 and (HLT 00302 or ANTH 02355 or ANTH 02215)

This advanced seminar focuses on the juxtaposition of global health issues from a cultural perspective through a lens of
diversity and equity. The intention is for students to concentrate attention to global health issues from various perspectives
considering how the historical, political and social dynamics intertwine. The culminating project of the course will be a
paper or project that demonstrates an in depth understanding of the cultural significance of a chosen topic.

END

Health and Wellness

HLT 00103:

This course stresses the concepts of lifetime health and physical fitness. It examines the positive effects of exercise upon
the heart and blood vessels, obesity and proper diet, body mechanics, and how the body handles stress. The course also
examines the negative effects of disease, including socially transmitted diseases, substance abuse including narcotics, alcohol
and tobacco, and other contemporary health-related problems. Students learn to analyze their strengths and limitations
while planning a personal wellness profile which best fits their needs and interest.

END

Stress Management

HLT 00170:

This course focuses on the nature of stress and the impact it has on a person's health. The student will study the
relationship of the physiological, psychological and social factors which contribute to one's general stress balance and
develop life skills to combat the negative impact of stress.

END

Psychological Aspects of Health

HLT 00180:

The course deals mostly with assisting students in meeting mental health problems in today's society. It emphasizes
modification in behavior, effects of chemicals on behavior, the psychology of sex, the psychology of accident prevention and
the psychological problems of aging. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Contemporary Health I

HLT 00192:

Prerequisites: Acceptance into one of the following programs Athletic Training, Health Promotion & Fitness Management, or Health &
Physical Education Teacher Certification.

This is the first in a series of two general knowledge based survey courses which provide students with knowledge of
current health issues which occur in the human life cycle. Topics which will be addressed are family life and human sexuality,
personal growth and development, mental and emotional health, aging and death and dying.

END

Contemporary Health II

HLT 00193:

This is the second in a series of two general knowledge based survey courses which provide students with knowledge of
current health issues which occur in the human lifecycle. Topics which will be addressed are alcohol, tobacco and other
drugs, personal health, chronic and infectious diseases, environmental health and consumerism.

END

Introduction to Public Health and Wellness

HLT 00200:

Community and Public Health examines the trends and components of the community health field. This course prepares
students for the additional courses in the Community Health Advocacy and Education program. Topics include foundations
of community health, epidemiology, health of the nation, community mental health, environmental health and occupational
safety.

END

Health Education for Elementary School Teachers

HLT 00209:

Elementary education majors will be prepared to conduct thorough and effective health education in grades K-6. This
course focuses on the nature and philosophy of health education and comprehensive school health programs as well as the
teacher's role in curriculum, instruction and evaluation as they impact student health-related behavior.

END

Consumer Health Decisions

HLT 00227:

This course examines the rights and responsibilities of a consumer faced with increasing amounts of information related to
his or her overall well-being. It examines the major problem of health fraud and the components of scientific research. The
role of advertising is explored, as well as sound principles for purchasing nutrition, fitness and other health-related products
and services. Students learn important concepts related to health insurance and hospitals, traditional and alternative medical
care and how to better manage the decisions they make.

END

Drugs, Alcohol, and Tobacco

HLT 00262:

This course is designed to examine in depth the use and abuse of drugs, alcohol and tobacco including the origins and
current status of use. Topics include types of drugs, physiological and psychological impact, assessment, monitoring and
prevention programs. Federal and state laws are considered and drug policy is examined. Furthermore, the societal impact of
drug use and abuse is examined. The content considers the topic from a health professional’s position and is specific to the
profession of wellness education.

END

Implementation and Assessment in Public Health

HLT 00300:

Prerequisites: HLT 00200

Implementation and Assessment in Public Health examines case studies and examples involving an array of public health
applications. This course prepares students to conduct and evaluate community and public health programs. Topics include
ethical components, qualitative data, evaluation design, data analysis and program planning and evaluation.

END

Health and Diverse Populations

HLT 00301:

The goal of this course is to enable students to understand the powerful influence of social, economic, geographic and
demographic factors on the health-related attitudes, beliefs and actions of individuals and communities. Students explore
the concepts of health literacy, health disparities, and the impact of public policy on the health status of different
populations from a social justice perspective. Social Capital is explored as a model for effectively improving the health status
of diverse populations.

END

Global Health

HLT 00302:

Global Health examines major health challenges and the solutions created to manage these challenges. Students will
analyze current and emerging global health issues, including diseases, poverty, conflicts, emergencies, and global initiatives
for prevention and promotion of well-being.

END

Environmental Issues and Health

HLT 00303:

This course exposes students to environmental health risks impact on human health. Students will examine the
relationship of lifestyle and the ability of the planet to sustain us. Students are introduced to conceptual definitions for
environmental health and hazards that impact human health. The importance of establishing and enforcing standards (local,
federal, occupational) which protect employees, communities, and the environment will be considered. Students will explore
areas in infectious disease, toxicology, environmental risk assessment, occupational safety, waste management, pollution,
and sustainability. Students will understand the importance of effective risk communication strategies/approaches and
advocacy for policies and laws that protect the future well being of our planet.

END

Grant Writing for Public Health-WI

HLT 00304:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 AND (HLT 00200 OR HPW 00210)

The goal of this course is to introduce students to the importance of grant-writing process and to provide them with
knowledge and experience of grant-writing. Students will learn how and where to find grant opportunities, the different
types of grants available, and how to write each component of a basic grant application.

END

HLT 00344:

This course provides an overview of public health’s role in healthcare history, delivery, financing and policy in the United
States. Governmental agencies roles and policies and healthcare statistics are considered as the shape public health.

US Health Care Systems

END

US Health Care Policy, Ethics, and Advocacy

HLT 00345:

Prerequisites: HLT 00344

This course will explore the legal and ethical foundations of US public health system and the subsequent conflict between
personal choice and the government and public health’s role in protecting the health of the population. The course will take
an in depth examination of public health policy creation that benefits the health of the population and the ethical
considerations of the policy. Finally, the course will consider strategies that public health specialists utilize to advocate for
the well-being of society. Case studies in obesity, HIV treatment, communicable diseases as well as other areas will be used
throughout this course.

END

Wellness Programming for Children Seminar

HLT 00347:

Prerequisites: Earn a grade of C- or higher in HPW 00340

This seminar prepares students who are not in a teacher preparation program to design and implement wellness programs
and initiatives for children and adolescents using age-appropriate strategies and materials. Students will apply the knowledge
and skills they have learned about behavior change and program planning to non-school settings that serve children and
adolescents.

END

Public Health Epidemiology

HLT 00348:

This course is designed to be an introduction to the basic principles of epidemiology and its role in Public Health. Students
will be introduced to terminology, measures of disease, outbreaks, screenings, causality, and risk. As these principles are
examined, students will be introduced to epidemiological research and surveillance tools. An essential component of the
class is the attention to problem solving scenarios that Public Health professionals encounter and use to promote health.

END

Introduction to Sport and Exercise Psychology

HLT 00370:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107

Introduction to Sport and Exercise Psychology examines theories and models of psychology related to performance.
Topics include personality, exercise environments, motivation, arousal, stress and anxiety, group processes, performance
enhancement and exercise and psychological well-being. This course is a prerequisite for Social Psychology of Sport.

END

Social Psychology of Sport

HLT 00371:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 and HLT 00370

Social Psychology of Sport examines issues related to athletic performance based on theoretical perspectives and current
research addressing the impact of social concepts on sport and exercise. Topics include relationships in sport, such as
coach-athlete and peer, team cohesion, group dynamics, effective communication, coach impact on leadership, motivational
climates and athletic transition.

END

Evidence-Based Approach to Applied Sport Psychology and Exercise

HLT 00372:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 AND HES 00370/PSY05320

Evidence-Based Approach to Applied Sport Psychology and Exercise examines research methods, assessments and
inventories utilized with populations in sport and exercise. Topics include ethics, diversity, purpose of assessment, screening
tools for mental health, injured athletes and athletes transitioning in their careers.

END

Health Problems of the Young Child

HLT 00390:

Designed primarily for the early childhood and kindergarten-primary education majors, this course covers observation,
detection, prevention and alleviation of physical, emotional and social health problems and disorders of the 3-8 year old
child. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Senior Seminar in Public Health and Wellness

HLT 00410:

Prerequisites: HLT 00200 OR HPW 00210

Students in this course are presented with the challenge of integrating the knowledge and skills they have learned in their
previous coursework to design, implement, and evaluate a small-scale health intervention, such as a behavior change
program or health screening, with a local population. They will prepare an application to a grant-funding agency as part of
the process. In addition, students will demonstrate their overall understanding of community and public health through the
completion of a written and oral comprehensive exam. In preparation for entry into the profession, students will develop a
resume, practice job interviewing skills, and explore graduate school options.

END

Senior Seminar in Human Performance in Clinical Settings

HLT 00413:

Prerequisites: C- or higher in HES 00401

This application-oriented course is designed to review and assess the students’ knowledge and skills which were developed
throughout the Human Performance in Clinical Setting program. Students will progress through a series of online seminars
reviewing the key concepts and skills learned in the program that are necessary for a career in the field of Human
Performance in Clinical Settings. In addition, students will work in group settings to continue to practice and develop key
skills necessary for their career.

END

Public Health Methods and Interventions

HLT 00415:

Prerequisites: HPW 00340, HPW 00350, HES 00301

This course will be a culminating experience and bring together content in public health. The course will explore needs
assessments, program creation, evaluation techniques and reporting. Analysis of case studies will be an integral component
of the course. Finally, students will have an opportunity to perform a needs assessment and create a program.

END

Internship in Public Health and Wellness

HLT 00483:

Prerequisites: C or better in HLT 00415 and HLT 00300 and HLT 00345 HLT 00348 and HLT 00302

Students complete 250 hours of supervised field experience enabling them to gain practical experience in an environment
focused in the professional health fields. Placements are made in organizations selected on the basis of student's goals and
interests. The internship sites will provide experiences that build on the skills, knowledge, and dispositions acquired during
coursework and related professional experiences.

END

Evaluation Procedures in Health

HLT 00485:

This course applies knowledge and skill in developing measuring techniques for program effectiveness, through types of
research procedures related to health. It includes competence in evaluating and interpreting health-related statistical data
and material from various national and international health organizations. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Problems and Issues in Health

HLT 00486:

This course assists students in understanding current problems and issues in health solutions by examining past and
possible future solutions. It stresses the latest health issues, such as AIDS, the cocaine problem, and teenage pregnancy.
This course may not be offered annually.

END

Wellness and Community Health Learning Assistant Seminar

HLT 00490:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

As Learning Assistants, students will develop educational experiences in facilitating active learning techniques in a
classroom with a Community Health or Health Promotion Wellness Management faculty. Being a Learning Assistant will
enhance a student's development and mastery of Exercise Science content as a result of facilitating student group
interactions and activities that encourage engagement. Students will meet weekly to develop teaching competencies that
better prepare students for future education endeavors like teaching and/or graduate assistantships, or college instructors in
their future careers.

END

Foundations of Health Promotion and Wellness Management

HPW 00210:

This course examines the history, purpose and current practice of health promotion and wellness in organizational
settings. Concepts of the field as they relate to corporations, hospitals, non-profit community health agencies and
commercial providers are discussed. Students meet with professionals in the field and learn how health promotion and
wellness are addressed in different organizations. Resources for professionals in the field are reviewed. Characteristics and
skills of successful professionals in this field are addressed.

END

Program Planning & Leadership in Health Promotion & Wellness

HPW 00340:

Prerequisites: (HPW 00350 or HLTH 37350)

This course identifies and explains the components of a successful health promotion and fitness program. Students learn
how to conduct a needs assessment, set goals and objectives, design intervention strategies, promote the program, find
resources, prepare a budget and evaluate a program. In addition, students sharpen their professional skills related to public
speaking, time management and business writing.

END

Health Behavior Theory and Counseling

HPW 00350:

Prerequisites: HPW 00210 or HLT 00200 or NUT 00230 or HES 00105

This course examines the factors that influence an individual's choices and behaviors related to health and the process of
motivating change within the individual to adopt healthful behaviors and discontinue unhealthful ones. Several theories of
health behavior are examined and applied. The different roles of the client and educator are addressed as the student is
prepared to counsel others in making positive health behavior changes.

END

Wellness Coaching Seminar

HPW 00351:

Prerequisites: HPW 00350

This course provides students an opportunity to learn and practice Wellness Coaching skills and Motivational
Interviewing strategies that were introduced in HPW 00350 Health Behavior: Theory and Practice. Building upon the
foundational content of prior coursework, students will have an opportunity to apply basic wellness coaching skills and
receive individualized, constructive feedback on their skills. In addition, students will learn and practice more advanced
coaching skills related to Powerful Questioning and different types of Reflection Statements designed to elicit internal
motivation within a coaching client.

END

Facility & Program Management in Wellness

HPW 00360:

Prerequisites: HPW 00210

This course examines the skills necessary to effectively manage a health promotion facility and program through the study
of the health and fitness facility management industry. Topics include training and managing staff, marketing programs and
services, customer service, financial management, legal concerns, equipment selection and health and safety issues.

END

Practicum in Health Promotion and Wellness Management

HPW 00430:

Prerequisites: (HPW 00340 or HLTH 37340)AND (PHED 35343 or HES 00343, with C- or better)

This is an application-oriented course in which students design and implement a health promotion/ fitness program for the
Rowan community. While the major emphasis is on the implementation of the program, students continue to meet weekly
to discuss and evaluate their progress. Specific topics related to the field, such as legal liability and resume preparation are
also addressed. In addition, students complete a formal evaluation of their professional qualities and skills for the health
promotion and fitness field.

END

INAR 05302:

This course examines the dynamic interiors of family life, focusing on the interpersonal relationships of family members
and current issues related to family life. Students choose course projects related to their professional or personal goals.

Contemporary American Family

END

Nutrition Education

INAR 06390:

This course provides an overview of nutrition education and explores the various settings in which nutrition education is
carried out. It introduces students to learning theory and reviews techniques and resources for teaching nutrition. Students
learn to assess the needs of different learner groups and develop, select, and evaluate appropriate nutrition education
materials. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Basic Nutrition

NUT 00200:

Students study human nutrition through the basic knowledge of nutrients and the physiological processes involved in the
utilization of food. They also develop an understanding of the ways in which age, health, social, and economic factors and
other variables affect nutritional needs and food practices. A computerized dietary analysis may be one of the course
requirements.

END

Introduction to Nutrition Professions

NUT 00230:

The goal of this course is to introduce students to the profession of nutrition and/or dietetics and to the competecies
necessary to be an effective leader in the health care field. Students will explore a variety of career opportunities in nutrition
and complete one professional site visit with a nutrition professional. Information on competencies and credentialing in the
field of nutrition, including the path to becoming a Registered Dietitian, will be reviewed. Principles of effective leadership
will be introduced.

END

Lifecycle Nutrition

NUT 00300:

Prerequisites: NUT 00200 (minimum grade of C) for undergraduate majors requiring this course

This course explores the theory and practice of improving the nutritional status of various populations along the life span.
Special needs within populations will be addressed, including obesity and diabetes, disordered eating, federal assistance
programs, and school nutrition policies and programs.

END

Management of Food and Nutrition Services

NUT 00310:

Prerequisites: NUT 00200 (minimum grade of C) for undergraduate majors requiring this course

This course explores the organizational and business skills needed to establish and operate a food service facility. Students
will learn about facility design, budgeting and accounting, human resources management, menu planning, regulatory
compliance and marketing of food service facilities.

END

Techniques of Food Preparation

NUT 00320:

Prerequisites: Earn a grade of C or higher in NUT 00230 and NUT 00310

This lab-based course offers student an opportunity to develop essential cooking and baking skills necessary for preparing
recipes properly and safely. Students will learn how to prepare a wide variety of foods from all food groups and will have
opportunities to improve their cooking and baking skills through evaluation of the foods they prepare.

END

Nutrition Therapy 1

NUT 00330:

Prerequisites: Earn a grade of C- or higher in BIOL 10210 and CHEM 06100

This is the first of a two-course sequence reviewing all aspects of nutritional care and therapy for patients with
nutrition-related diseases. In this course, students are introduced to the concepts of nutrition assessment, care and therapy
as part of a plan to treat disease. Methods of medical and nutritional record-keeping are also examined, as students learn
how dietitiansn work within a health care team.

END

Nutrition Therapy 2

NUT 00340:

Prerequiste: Earn a grade of C or higher in NUT 00330
This is the second of a two-course sequence reviewing all aspects of nutritional care and therapy for patients with
nutrition-related diseases. Building upon the first course, students expand their understanding and application of nutrition
assessment, care and therapy as part of a plan to treat disease. Specific diseases of focus in this course include diabetes,
mellitus, anemia, hepatitis, cancer and other diseases of the liver, kidneys, cardiovascular system, and pulmonary system.

END

Nutrition Therapy 2 Laboratory

NUT 00341:

Prerequisites: NUT 00330

The course provides students the opportunity to practice nutrition assessment and intervention skills in a practice
laboratory setting. Essential components of medical nutrition therapy including nutrition focused physical exam techniques,
calculation of enteral and parenteral nutrition solutions, and glucose monitoring will be presented in lab. Students will
perform hands on techniques to complement topics covered in Nutrition Therapy 2. The role of nutrition therapy will be
emphasized through projects and activities throughout the lab course.

END

Community Nutrition

NUT 00350:

Prerequisites: NUT 00300 (minimum grade of C) for undergraduate majors requiring this course

This course prepares students with the skills and knowledge they need to become effective nutrition educators in a
community setting among diverse populations, including different cultural backgrounds and learning abilities. Students will
learn the elements of planning, implementing and evaluating nutrition education programs in a variety of delivery formats.

END

NUT 00400:

Quantity Food Production

Prerequisites: Earn a grade of C or higher in NUT 00310

This course builds upon student's knowledge of managing a food service facility by specifically addressing the challenge of
food production in larger volume. Students learn how to develop menus, calculate costs, maintain food safety, extend and
convert recipes, procure and store foods and ingredients, estimate labor needs, and market a large-scale food service
operation.

END

Nutrition and Public Health

NUT 00410:

Prerequisites: NUT 00350 Minimum Grade of C

This course will focus on policy and professional issues which affect the nutrition and dietetics profession. These include
including professional ethics standards, state and federal legislation, political advocacy, and the mission and function of
leading health and nutrition agencies. Students will have opportunities to engage in the advocacy process as they meet with
professional representing these agencies and legislative efforts to discuss current issues facing the profession.

END

Nutrition for Fitness

NUT 00415:

Prerequisites: Undergraduate level NUT 00200 Minimum Grade of C and BIOL 10210 minimum grade of C- and BIOL 10212
minimum grade of a C-

This advanced nutrition course explores the relationship between nutrition, physical fitness, performance and disease
prevention. Specific topics include nutrition fraud, supplementation, ergogenic aids, diet planning for athletes and the
relationship between nutrition and chronic diseases such as cancer and heart disease. In addition, students continue to
develop their skills as nutrition counselors and educators.

END

Contemporary Issues in Nutrition

NUT 00420:

Prerequisites: NUT 00200, (minimum grade of C) for undergraduate majors requiring these courses

This upper-level nutrition course provides students with a forum to critically consider controversial issues in nutrition
research, education and policy. The influence of governmental agencies, the food industry, the media, and consumer
advocacy groups on the dietary guidelines provided for Americans is examined. Students are challenged to apply their
nutrition knowledge and education skills as they provide a nutrition consultation for a client. This course is relevant for
students desiring to enter the fields of public or community health upon graduation.

END

Principles of Food Science

NUT 00425:

Prerequisites: Undergraduate level CHEM 06101 minimum grade of a C-

Food science integrates several branches of science with emerging technologies to better understand the properties of
nutrients with a goal of expanding and improving the food supply. Students will explore the effects of preparation methods,
commercial processing, and storage systems on the safety, quality and nutritional value of a variety of nutrients and foods.

END

Integrative and Functional Nutrition

NUT 00460:

Prerequisites: NUT 00200

The course provides an overview of the essential components of integrative and functional nutrition including optimal
health through a holistic approach to patient care using natural products and mind- body maneuvers. The gastrointestinal
tract and microbiome, mind–body connection, environmental toxins and effects, and dietary supplements will be addressed.
The role of the integrative and functional dietitian will be emphasized through projects and activities throughout the course.

END

Maternal and Child Nutrition

NUT 00465:

Prerequisites: NUT 00200

The course provides an overview of nutritional needs in the following populations: females in their reproductive years,
pregnant and lactating women, infants, children, and adolescents. Evidenced based guidelines will be discussed to provide an
in-depth review of the nutrition concerns among these patient populations in the community setting. Topics discussed
include nutrition and fertility, human breast milk, breastfeeding promotion, nutrition during infancy, childhood, and
adolescents including obesity and disordered eating.

END

NUT 00470:

Nutrition Education

Prerequisites: NUT 00300 Minimum Grade of C

Students will examine communication and educational practices relevant to dietetics. The course will provide hands on
experiences with individual and group education in a variety of nutrition related topics.

END

Nutrition and Aging

NUT 00476:

Prerequisites: NUT 00200

This course will explore the nutritional needs of aging adults. It will focus on nutritional ramifications as it relates to the
physiological and biological changes of aging, as well as nutritional ramifications for common age-related diseases. The
nutritional implications for demographic groups within the older adult population, along with age-related issues related to
food consumption, poly-pharmacy, and physical activity and functioning will be introduced. Specific considerations will be
given to the eating environment and physiological changes older adult experience that influence food access, preparation,
and consumption as they pertain to those older adults living in the community and facilities. Students will understand
chronic disease prevention and management as it relates to aging.

END

Senior Seminar In Nutrition

NUT 00484:

Prerequisites: NUT 00200

This course assesses the students’ knowledge, skills, and disposition to begin a career in the field of Nutrition. The primary
focus will be a comprehensive review of all course work taught within the major. In addition, students will refine their
resumes, interview skills, complete their professional development hours, and prepare for their internship, career, and or
graduate school.

END

SENIOR INTERNSHIP IN NUTRITION

NUT 00485:

Prerequisites: NUT 00484 C- or better.

Students complete 250 hours of supervised field experience enabling them to gain practical experience in an environment
focused on Nutrition, Dietetics or other, related field. Placements are made in agencies selected on the basis of student's
goals, interests, and program specialization. The site will provide experiences that build on the skills, knowledge, and
dispositions acquired during coursework and related professional experiences.

END

Macronutrient Metabolism

NUT 00490:

Prerequisites: NUT 00415 AND CHEM 07200

This course provides an in-depth examination of carbohydrate, lipid, and protein in the human body. Specific topics
include the digestion, transport, and metabolism of each of the macronutrients, recommendations for consumption of each
macronutrient, and the relationship between the macronutrients and disease. This course is for Nutrition majors. This does
not count as part of the Chemistry or Biochemistry major curricula nor does it satisfy any requirements for those majors or
the Chemistry minor.

END

Micronutrient Metabolism

NUT 00495:

Prerequisites: NUT 00415 AND CHEM 07200

This course is an investigation of the biochemical and clinical aspects of micronutrient metabolism. All of the essential
vitamins and minerals are explored in depth. Toxicity symptoms, deficiency diseases, food sources and primary functions are
reviewed for each essential vitamin and mineral. Students also discuss controversies surrounding recommended dietary
allowances. This course is for Nutrition majors. This does not count as part of the Chemistry or Biochemistry major
curricula nor does it satisfy any requirements for those majors of the Chemistry minor.

END

Advanced Nutritional Assessment

NUT 00500:

Prerequisites: Must be accepted into the M.S. in Nutrtitionand Dietetics program and in the fifth (graduate) year ofthe program.

This graduate level course will expands upon the nutritional assessment skills of dietetics students to enable them to
perform a complete client assessment. Students will learn to assess lifestyle habits, health risks, dietary intake, biometric
measurements, and results of blood, stool, saliva and urine laboratory tests. Students will integrate assessment data into a
comprehensive analysis and development of a meal plan for a client. Client confidentiality, data management and follow-up
nutrition counseling skills will also be addressed throughout the course.

END

Advanced Topics in Public Health Nutrition

NUT 00510:

Prerequisites: Earn a grade of C or higher in NUT 00410

This course has students explore the relationship between nutrition, wellness and disease prevention. Students will
examine the interaction between the physical and social environment, lifestyle habits and biological factors in determining
the health status of a population and the role nutrition plays in addressing them. The development, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of nutrition programs and research needed to address current public health issues will be
explored throughout the course.

END

Introduction To Athletic Training

PHED 35105:

This course is designed as an initial experience for students considering a career in athletic training. Students will be
introduced to various domains, competencies, and proficiencies related to athletic training. An in-depth look at the field of
athletic training and the requirements of the athletic training program will be discussed. An observational field experience is
required.

END

Introduction to Disease Management

RESP 09461:

Prerequisites: Program admission or permission of the instructor

This course will provide an introduction to the various strategies currently used to reduce health care costs while
improving the quality of life for individuals with chronic conditions. This course will examine the long-term effects of
COPD, CHF, asthma and other chronic conditions affecting the cardiopulmonary system. Other topics will include the
Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program, (HRPP) its impact on reimbursement, the role of the COPD navigator and
other disease management programs and the key role the respiratory therapist plays.

END

The West in the World to 1600

HIST 05100:

This course examines the entanglements of European peoples and nations in the region and wider world before 1600. It
emphasizes cultural, social, intellectual, political and economic transformations, and interactions with other parts of the
world from neolithic times to the 17th century. This course introduces students to the principles and methodology of
history.

END

The West in the World since 1600

HIST 05101:

This course examines the entanglements of European peoples and nations in the region and wider world after 1600. It
emphasizes cultural, social, intellectual, political and economic transformations, and interactions with other parts of the
world from the 17th century to the present. This course introduces students to the principles and methodology of history.

END

History of Now

HIST 05110:

This course introduces students to the importance of history in today’s world, allows them to explore how history is made,
and encourages them to develop analytical skills. Students will have the opportunity to do history by encountering and
interpreting documents and artifacts from the past, and they will consider how history affects their own daily lives. The
thematic focus will change from semester to semester.

END

World History Since 1500

HIST 05120:

This course studies the key changes in the patterns of interaction among the major cultures of the earth from the
beginnings of European Expansion in the 1500's. The course covers the roots of European Expansion, the response of the
Confucian, modern, and non-Eurasian cultures, and the emergence of a non-Western Third World Block since 1914.

END

United States To 1865

HIST 05150:

This course examines the historical roots of the American democratic traditions, with the emphasis on understanding the
political, social and cultural forces developed in the new physical setting of North American and finally welded into a unified
nation.

END

United States Since 1865

HIST 05151:

This course analyzes the principal political, social and cultural factors conditioning the life of the nation since the Civil
War. It emphasizes the issues facing modern America with the impact of industrialization and the problems of world
leadership.

END

American Military History, 1775-Present

HIST 05273:

A survey of American military experience since the Revolution, this course analyzes military action and its effect on the
home front against a background of politics, technology, diplomacy, and personality. This course may not be offered
annually.

END

Historical Methods-WI

HIST 05306:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course offers intensive training in the techniques of historical research and analysis of historical writing. Required of
History majors as pre-req for other upper-level courses.

END

Ancient Mediterranean World

HIST 05307:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course begins with the earliest Near Eastern civilization and ends with the collapse of Rome. It deals with the wide
diversities within this span through selected topics, using readings from primary sources and secondary interpretations. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

Modern Middle East

HIST 05308:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course provides an introduction to the history of the Middle East from 1800 to the present, a period of intense change
in the region. It examines the transition from empires to nation states and the rise and fall of European imperialism in the
area. This course is typically offered in the spring semester. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Medieval Europe

HIST 05310:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course examines the development of Europe from the particularism of the feudal age to the formation of national
states. It covers political evolution, integrating it with the social, economic and cultural trends giving particular stress to the
reading of primary sources in translation. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Renaissance And Reformation

HIST 05311:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course examines the Renaissance in Italy and northern Europe, the Protestant and Catholic Reformations and their
impact upon the politics and culture of the period, the growth of a capitalistic society, overseas expansion and the
beginnings of modern science. It uses reading of primary sources. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Age Of Enlightenment 1648-1789

HIST 05312:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course studies Europe from the end of the Thirty Years War to the French Revolution including the significant
intellectual development known as the Enlightenment, the development of the national monarchies, colonization and the
colonial wars. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Age Of Revolutions 1760-1848

HIST 05313:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course emphasizes the dramatic changes that occurred in European society during this period. It examines the
political, social, economic and intellectual factors that stimulated change, using readings in primary sources and secondary
interpretations. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Europe 1871-1914

HIST 05314:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course examines the period in terms of its dual character as the climax of Enlightenment and as the source of later
disillusionment. The course emphasizes Europe and not any particular country, giving particular attention to the
historiographical problem of the causes of World War I. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Twentieth Century Europe to 1945

HIST 05315:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course analyzes significant themes in European history prior to 1945. It stresses the important economic, social and
intellectual trends and major political events. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Twentieth Century Europe since 1945

HIST 05316:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course analyzes significant themes in European history since 1945. It stresses important economic, social, and
intellectual trends and major political events. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Ancient Greece

HIST 05319:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course will cover the history of ancient Greece from its prehistoric beginnings, through the flourishing and collapse of
Helladic culture at the end of the Bronze Age, to the formation of the "Classical World" following the Dark Ages. Particular
attention will be given to the role and importance of Homer in shaping Greek history and ideals; the rise of the city-state
during the Archaic Period; the peculiarities of Sparta and Athens, and their rivalry and clash from the Persian to the
Peloponnesian Wars. Emphasis shall be placed upon contemporary perceptions of, and reactions to these events as found in
primary sources (in translation), and their utility for recovering and reconstructing Hellenic history.

END

HIST 05320:

Britain to 1715

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

END

Civil War And Reconstruction

HIST 05322:

Prerequisites: HIST 05150 and ( HIST 05306 or AMST 13301)

This course provides a detailed political, economic and cultural analysis of the causes of the Civil War. It makes a searching
study of the years of reconstruction and their significance for our own times, giving particular emphasis to interpreting the
era and its overall significance. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Twentieth Century U.S.

HIST 05324:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

From the Progressives of the early twentieth century to the present, this course attempts to probe the trends and ideas
which form the basis of our present points of view in attempting to solve contemporary problems. This course may not be
offered annually.

END

Britain since 1715

HIST 05326:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course explores developments in English society, government, art, and literature with special emphasis on eighteenth
century social and constitutional customs; nineteenth century urbanization, industrialization, imperialism and the attendant
social and political consequences; twentieth century world wars, the creation of the welfare state and decolonization. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

Victorian Britain

HIST 05327:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course examines the social and economic history of Britain from the Reform Act of 1832 to the constitutional crises of
1910, giving special attention to those social and economic factors that underlie British Imperialism. This course may not be
offered annually.

END

US Urban History

HIST 05334:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course surveys the development of urban America from the 17th century in the U.S. with emphasis on architecture
and city planning as well as the traditional attitudes of Americans toward the city and the country. This course may not be
offered annually.

END

Russia To 1914

HIST 05343:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course traces the origin, rise and development of Russia until the end of the Imperial period. It emphasizes the
formative features in Russian history, using readings from primary sources and secondary interpretations. This course may
not be offered annually.

END

Russia Since 1914

HIST 05344:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course emphasizes the revolutionary forces which led to the explosions of 1905 and 1917. The course carefully studies
the nature and dynamics of the Communist Party and the Soviet government. It involves readings from primary sources and
secondary interpretation. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Topics in History

HIST 05345:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or AMST 13301

This course introduces students to in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme, including work with historical sources,
critical reading of historians' accounts, intensive writing and class discussion.

END

Intellectual History Of The U.S.

HIST 05346:

Prerequisites: HIST 05150 and HIST 05151 and (COMP 01112 or AMST 13301)

This course deals with the main currents in American thought and society from colonial times to the present. It
emphasizes discussion of high culture as essential to the understanding of the political and economic process of the
American democratic experiment. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Colonial Latin America

HIST 05347:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course examines racial and cultural diversity of the region, establishment of Iberian institutions and challenges from
other empires, the Enlightenment in Hispanic America and the beginnings of independence movements. This course may
not be offered annually.

END

Modern Latin America

HIST 05350:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course examines the history of Latin America from independence to the present, focusing on concepts such as
violence, race, slavery, gender, governance, and revolution. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Modern Japan

HIST 05351:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course offers analysis of the developments of island East Asia (Japan) from the time of the Tokugawa Shogunate's
contribution to the development of modern Japan and Japanese involvement in modern Western expansionism to the
emergence of Japanese expansionism and contemporary Japan, including the various aspects which affect historical
development. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Chinese Cultural History

HIST 05352:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course covers essential features of Chinese culture from the 5th century BC to the present, including philosophy,
religion, literature, geography, social and family structure, foreign cultural relations, and art. Students will also learn current
scholarship on the subject and recent cultural trends. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Imperialism And Colonialism

HIST 05353:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or AMST 13301

This course analyzes nineteenth and twentieth century imperialism in terms of its meaning, origins and development. It
emphasizes institutional background, theory and practice and the "national liberation" movements, using readings in
primary sources and secondary interpretations. This course may not be offered annually.

END

HIST 05355:

Modern China

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course analyzes the development of mainland and island East Asia (China and Japan) from the early involvement with
rising Western expansionism to the present. This course may not be offered annually.

END

US Food History

HIST 05357:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

What do Americans eat, and what makes food "American?" This course will cover selected topics in US food history from
European contact to the present day. Students will gain an understanding of major events and trends in US food history
from social, cultural, economic, and technological perspectives.

END

US Foreign Relations to 1900

HIST 05358:

Prerequisites: HIST 05150 and COMP 01112

This course surveys U.S. diplomatic history from the Revolutionary period through the emergence of the U.S. as a colonial
power. The course stresses the impact of public opinion, cultural and political relations, as well as economic and strategic
factors. It will analyze conflicting scholarly interpretations. This course may not be offered annually.

END

US Foreign Relations since 1900

HIST 05359:

Prerequisites: HIST 05151 and COMP 01112

This course details the U.S. attempt to cope with the international complications and responsibilities brought about by
20th-century reality. The course stresses the impact of public opinion, cultural and political relations, as well as economic
and strategic factors and analyzes conflicting scholarly interpretations. This course may not be offered annually.

END

History Of Mexico And The Caribbean

HIST 05362:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course focuses on the development of Mexico and her Central American and Caribbean island neighbors. Although
the course deals mainly with events from the time of independence to the present, it also discusses key eras in the
pre-Columbian and colonial periods. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Ottoman History

HIST 05363:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course will examine the history and development of the Ottoman Empire from its origins in the 13th century to its
partition following World War I. Topics to be covered include its system of government and ruling elite, the cultural and
daily life of Ottoman subjects, 19th and 20th century reform movements, and debates about the origins and "decline" of the
empire. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Topics in Global History

HIST 05364:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course introduces students to in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in global history, including work with
historical sources, critical reading of historians' accounts, intensive writing and class discussion. Past and proposed topics
include the partition of Africa and Stalinism.

END

History Of The Cold War

HIST 05365:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or AMST 13301

This course explores the history of the Cold War by combining lecture and class discussion in a format that seeks to
immerse students in the complex series of peaceful and violent interactions between the Soviet Union and the United States
(and their allies and client states) that made up the Cold War. The course will focus on several critical issues and the debates
among historians over their causes and outcomes. Those issues include: the origins of the Cold War, Stalin and the Soviet
system, the Berlin Crisis, war on the Korean peninsula, the Cuban Missile Crisis, the Vietnam War, detente, and the
collapse of the Communist Bloc. This course may not be offered annually.

END

History of Medicine in Africa

HIST 05366:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course explores health, disease, and healing in Africa from the early nineteenth century to the present. It considers
how biomedicine shaped African understandings and experiences of health and how African ideas and practices in turn
affected biomedicine. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Gender, Sexuality And History

HIST 05367:

Prerequisites: HIST 05150 or HIST 05151 and COMP 01112

This course examines the intersections of sexuality and gender from an historical perspective, i.e., how attitudes toward
both have changed over time. It will also analyze sexuality and gender as social and historical constructs within American
society from the colonial era to the modern age.

END

Topics in United States History

HIST 05368:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or AMST 13301

This course introduces a topical approach to U.S. history and involves an analysis of major events and ideas that have
shaped U.S. society that uses historical methodology and interpretation. The course covers issues such as race, sex and youth
in American society and protest movements. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Indigenous History in the US

HIST 05369:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course examines the history of indigenous peoples whose homelands reside in the contemporary United States. It
begins with Native American origin stories and traditions and moves through the colonization period to the modern day.
Major topics covered include contact and interaction, accommodation and resistance, warfare and education, governmental
programs and reform movements. This course may not be offered annually.

END

U.S. Legal And Constitutional History To 1870

HIST 05371:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

In this course, students will learn how American law and the Constitution developed from their English roots. This English
Common law heritage of American law means that historical development is a part of contemporary law, as justices
interpret a Constitution written over 200 years ago. As a part of gaining a strong foundation in American law and
government, the course will pause and spend significant time exploring the Constitutional era, in order to be able to evaluate
competing ideas today like "original intent" and the "evolving Constitution." The course will continue through the
Reconstruction Amendments to gain perspective on how American law and the Constitution survived and changed during
its first chapter.

END

U.S. Legal And Constitutional History Since 1870

HIST 05372:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306 or AMST 13301

In this course, students will learn how American law and the Constitution developed in the late 19th and early 20th century
beginning with the transformative Reconstruction movements. The course is structured thematically, looking at criminal
law, professionalization of the law, the expansion of the federal government, and the rise of civil rights, in order to
understand the current legal culture.

END

Civil Rights/Black Power Movements

HIST 05373:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course offers a profound re-examination of the Civil Rights-Black Power movements since the 1970s. Special
attention is given to ongoing debates over the origins, development, regional boundaries, leadership, protest strategies, and
effects of the movement. We will cover a variety of themes ranging from post-WWII racial politics, gender, interracial
alliances, grassroots activism, transnational movements, and the Cold War to the constructed images of Martin Luther
King, Jr.

END

The United States since 1945

HIST 05375:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course is designed to provide students with an in-depth study of the social, economic, cultural, technological and
political forces that shaped the United States since 1945. This course may not be offered annually.

END

African American History To 1865

HIST 05376:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course surveys the major social, economic and cultural developments of the black community from Africa to the Civil
War. It emphasizes a comparison of the transition from Africa to slave culture and studies the contribution of blacks to the
making of America.

END

African American History Since 1865

HIST 05377:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course studies the development of the black community from emancipation to contemporary America, tracing such
major themes as the pattern of migration and the various methods of black protest developed and employed in the 20th and
21st centuries.

END

History of Camden

HIST 05378:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

The purpose of this course is twofold. First, it examines the multifaceted origins of the “urban crisis” in a city that has
developed an infamous reputation as the poorest and most dangerous metropolis in American. Students will investigate the
historical legacy of political and socioeconomic factors that have shaped the urban problems in a post-industrial city like
Camden such as: racial segregation, deindustrialization, white flight and suburban sprawl, public housing, urban renewal and
environmental racism. Second, this is a service-learning course that will require students to participate in several
community-based projects in the city that introduce them to policymakers, social activists, and ordinary residents working
towards improving the myriad challenges in Camden. This course will be offered every other year.

END

HIST 05379:

Ancient Egypt

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course will study the culture and history of ancient Egypt from its predynastic beginnings to its formation as the first
nation state (c. 3000 BCE) through its apex as an imperial power in the New Kingdom and decline (1050 BCE). Special
attention will be paid to the African and Near Eastern origins of ancient Egyptian society; the institution of kingship; the
place of ancient Egypt in the development of ethics and religion; and the complexities of imperialism. Emphasis will be
placed upon Egyptologists' use of primary sources and their role in the recovery and reconstruction of ancient Egyptian
history.

END

Traditional Jewish History

HIST 05380:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306

This course traces the origin, faith, law and development of the Jewish people to the 16th century, with emphasis on
traditional Jewish culture and values; Jewish literature, the phenomenon of anti-Semitism and the Jewish contribution to
Western civilization. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Modern Jewish History

HIST 05381:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course examines the development of Jewry in Poland, Germany and the U.S. with special emphasis on modern Jewish
thought, Zionism, the Nazi holocaust, the rise of Israel and the situation of Judaism and Jews at the present time. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

Islamic Civilization

HIST 05383:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course provides an introduction to Islam and Islamic history, concentrating on the Middle East and North Africa,
from the emergence of Islam in the 7th century A.D. through the establishment of the Safavid Dynasty in the 16th century.
The course is designed to familiarize students with basic themes and debates related to Islamic history, religion, cultures,
and societies using a variety of primary sources as well as secondary interpretations.

END

Cultural History of U.S.

HIST 05384:

Prerequisites: HIST 05150 or HIST 05151 and COMP 01112 or AMST 13301

This course explores trends in the fine arts and literature from 1607 to the present on three different levels: high style or
urban culture, popular culture and rural or folk culture. It emphasizes specific American interpretations of parallel European
developments. This course may not be offered annually

END

History Of New Jersey

HIST 05386:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or AMST 13301

This course explores the historical background of the pre-European beginnings, colonial exploitation and settlement, the
Revolution, growth of the state's leading industries, the development of transportation and problems of government. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

Public History

HIST 05387:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course will expose students to the variety of ways the public engages with history. Students will explore how history is
communicated to the public, how public history sites contribute to public memory, controversies in public history settings,
the relationship between academic and public history, and career opportunities for historians beyond the classroom. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

History of U.S. Latin American Relations

HIST 05389:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course explores both sides of the US-Latin American relationship, tracing its development over time and analyzing its
current challenges. Throughout the course, students will integrate US and Latin American perspectives, drawing on both
primary and secondary sources. We will explore questions including: What interests and objectives shape US policy towards
Latin America? What interests and objectives have shaped Latin American states’ policies towards the US? How have
non-governmental actors in both the US and Latin America influenced international relations across the Western
Hemisphere? This course may not be offered annually.

END

History of Sports, Politics, and Society in Latin America

HIST 05391:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course examines sports –mainly soccer and baseball-- as a lens to study the development of modern Latin American
history, culture, and politics. We will look at primary source documents, policy memos, movies, and literature about sports
as a lens to study foreign relations, class, race, drugs, and state violence across the region. The class examines how sports act
as a way for citizens to talk about their nation, its people, and its politics throughout the last two centuries. This course may
not be offered annually.

END

Sub-Saharan Africa To 1800

HIST 05394:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course surveys the regions and cultures of sub-Saharan Africa from the earliest origins to the beginning of European
colonialism to provide an appreciation of the variety and significance of historical developments prior to the coming of the
Europeans. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Sub-Saharan Africa Since 1800

HIST 05397:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

Students survey the development of sub-Saharan Africa during the colonial period and the new national period which
followed, making an analysis of colonialism both as a European venture and as an episode in African historical development.
This course may not be offered annually.

END

Digital History

HIST 05399:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course teaches students how to use digital tools to better understand, interpret, and communicate about the past.
Combining scholarship and practice, the course prepares students to become both discerning users of online historical
material and innovative creators of new digital history work. Students will gain firsthand experience using digital tools and
build practical skills through collaborative in-class exercises related to mapping, data visualization, digital exhibit curation,
web publishing, metadata creation, and audio and transcription editing. They will also gain digital public history skills by
practicing writing for broad audiences and presenting complex information in accessible ways.

END

Arab-Israeli Conflict

HIST 05404:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306 or HIST 05306 or IS 25300

This course focuses on the history and development of the Arab-Israeli conflict from its genesis in the late 19th century to
the present day. It covers a variety of topics including the origins of Zionism, Palestinian nationalism, the development of
the conflict before 1948, the Arab-Israeli Wars, and peace plans. It is typically offered every other year.

END

Nazi Germany and the Holocaust

HIST 05406:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306

This course examines the attempted systematic destruction of the Jews of Europe and their culture, as well as the
persecution of others on the basis of physical and emotional disabilities, ethnicity, politics, religion and sexual orientation at
the hands of the Nazis and their collaborators between 1933 and 1945. This course may not be offered annually.

END

History Of World War II

HIST 05407:

Prerequisites: (HIST 05306 or AMST 13301) and (HIST 05101 or HIST 05120 or HIST 05151)

This course explores the Second World War in global perspective, with special attention to diplomatic, military and
cultural history. It studies the origins and cause of the war; the six years of military campaigns; the impact on ordinary
people and their communities; and the extent to which the conflict has shaped the world we live in today. This course may
not be offered annually.

END

Latin American Revolutions And Reform

HIST 05409:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306

This course examines the often violent movements in Latin American history directed to achieve social, economic, and
political reform. It emphasizes the Mexican, Cuban, and Chilean movements. This course may not be offered annually.

END

European Intellectual History Since The 16th Century

HIST 05410:

Prerequisites: HIST 05101 and HIST 05306

This course covers the major themes in European intellectual history. It includes such topics as the birth and diffusion of
the Enlightenment, Romanticism, 19th century liberalism, positivism, the Darwinian Revolution, Marxism, nationalistic
thought, irrationalism in political and philosophical thought, existentialism and contemporary ideas. This course may not be
offered annually.

END

Topics In Latin American History

HIST 05411:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306

This course analyzes selected topics in Latin American history since 1808. It reviews various topics and historiographical
controversies. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Comparative Race Relations: South Africa, Brazil, And The U.S.

HIST 05413:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306 or AMST 13301 or AFST 11104 and COMP 01112 or IS 25300

This course offers a comparative examination of the development of multi-racial societies in Brazil, South Africa and the
United States, and the impact of race on the political, social and economic cultures of the respective countries. This course
may not be offered annually.

END

HIST 05416:

History of France

END

Women In Islam

HIST 05417:

Prerequisites: HIST 05299 or HIST 05306 or IS 25300

This course aims to acquaint students with the role of women in Islam as a religion. It focuses on the wide range of
women's experiences in different periods of history and in diverse Muslim societies, and introduces students to a variety of
works and approaches to the field, including primary and secondary sources. The course is typically offered every other year.

END

Women In Europe To 1700

HIST 05418:

Prerequisites: HIST 05100 and HIST 05306

This course traces the changing status and experience of women from classical civilizations through the early modern
period of European history. Themes covered include women's role in religious life, early women's writings, women in the age
of chivalry, early modern witch hunting, and the first stirrings of feminist thought. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Women In Modern Europe

HIST 05419:

Prerequisites: (HIST 05101 or HIST 05120) and HIST 05306

This course examines the history of women in modern Europe, from the 18th century to the 20th. Themes covered include
the rise of domesticity, feminism in the age of revolutions, Victorian women, changing patterns of work and family, and the
rise of women's activism. This course may not be offered annually.

END

British Empire/Commonwealth

HIST 05420:

Analyzes those incidents, persons and movements that altered the character of the empire and influenced its governing
philosophy. Emphasis is on the changing face of both the dependent empire and the empire of white settlement. Examines
the legacy of British imperialism.

END

Women In American History

HIST 05422:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306 or AMST 13301

This course focuses on the role of women in American history and culture, but some consideration is also given to Western
traditions, myths and ideas which have affected American women. The range of topics is almost limitless. This course may
not be offered annually.

END

Women in Early American History

HIST 05423:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306

This course traces the changing status and experience of American women from the first encounters between indigenous
peoples and colonial settlers through the late nineteenth century. Themes covered include work, religion, education, slavery,
western settlement, culture, activism, sexuality, and ideas about gender. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Women in Modern American History

HIST 05424:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306

This course traces the changing status and experience of American women from the late nineteenth century through the
present day. Themes covered include work, religion, education, culture, feminism, politics, sexuality, and ideas about
gender. This course may not be offered annually.

END

History Of Feminisms

HIST 05425:

Prerequisites: HIST 05299 or HIST 05306 or IS 25300

This course examines the history and origins of modern feminisms from European and American traditions to emergence
in developing nations. Students will analyze and comprehend the intellectual, social, philosophical, political, and religious
underpinnings of the development of feminisms from the Middle Ages to the present day in western and non-western
contexts. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Colonial North America 1500-1775

HIST 05426:

Prerequisites: HIST 05150 and (HIST 05299 or HIST 05306 or AMST 13301)

This course will examine in-depth the political, economic, social and cultural forces that shaped North America from the
time of Columbus' first voyage to the onset of the American Revolution. This will include the study of the variety of
European settlements, the impact of European conquest and colonization on native populations, and the threefold
relationship between Native Americans, Europeans and Africans that the colonial experience initiated in North America.
This course may not be offered annually.

END

The American Revolution And Early Republic, 1775-1828

HIST 05427:

Prerequisites: (HIST 05306 or AMST 13301) and HIST 05150

This course will examine the political, economic, social, and cultural factors that led to the onset of the American
Revolution, the outbreak of the Revolutionary War, and the creation of the United States of America. This will include
study of the adoption of the Constitution, popular challenges to federal power, and the character of American society and
politics during the Early Republic. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Family History

HIST 05428:

Prerequisites: (HIST 05101 or HIST 05120) and HIST 05306

A comparative and thematic study employing the methods and techniques of new social historians, this course gives
students an understanding of the interplay between family and historical processes. This course may not be offered annually.

END

The United States during World War II

HIST 05436:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306 or AMST 13301

This course explores the lives of ordinary people under the strains of war, examining social and economic factors which
undergirded the military and political decisions of World War II. This course may not be offered annually.

END

HIST 05437:

Twentieth Century African Nationalism

Prerequisites: HIST 05306 or AFST 11104 and COMP 01112 or (HIST 05299) or IS 25300

In this course students will explore the history of 20th century Africa through an in-depth analysis of independence
movements from their roots in the European conquest of the continent at the turn of the century to their legacies in Africa
today. This course may not be offered annually.

END

History Of The Vietnam War

HIST 05438:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306 or AMST 13301

This course will explore the political, economic, military, diplomatic, social, and cultural dimensions and ramifications of
the war from the perspective of all peoples involved. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Topics in Global History

HIST 05443:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306

This course introduces students to in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in global history, including work with
historical sources, critical reading of historians' accounts, intensive writing and class discussion. Past and proposed topics
include the partition of Africa and Stalinism.

END

Islamist Movements

HIST 05444:

Prerequisites: HIST 05299 or HIST 05306 or IS 25300

This course will explore the history of radical Islamist movements, commonly termed "Islamic Fundamentalists," and their
increasing strength since the 1970s. Students will explore the writings of infuential Islamist writers as well as the goals,
idealogy, and tactics of a wide variety of Islamist opposition groups, regimes, and groups operating in Western coutries. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

Race, Identity And History In East Asia

HIST 05446:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306

This is an upper-level history course that explores race relations in modern societies from a comparative perspective.
Following a basic chronology, the course will be taught thematically. After a brief introduction to the rise of racism in the
modern Western world, it will trace ideas and discourses on race in China prior to the 19th century and examine their
influence in shaping the world order in East Asia. It will then discuss how the racial discourses changed after the region was
exposed to Western influences from the mid-19th century onward. Its foci are how the East Asians appropriated the racial
discourses from the West, how they forged nationalist ideas and constructed nation-states, and how they wrote history from
nationalist and racialist perspectives.

END

Late Imperial China

HIST 05448:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306

This is an upper-level course on the history of late imperial China, or the rise and fall of the Ming and Qing dynasties from
the mid 14th to the early 20th centuries. During this period, China saw an impressive rise of commercial and urban culture,
which impacted the relationship among ethnic groups and between genders in family and society. The Ming-Qing dynastic
transition also generated lasting changes that shaped the course of development in modern Chinese history. In addition, the
course discusses such epoch-making events as the reconstruction of the Great Wall, Zheng He's maritime expeditions and
the rise of "evidential learning" as an intellectual movement.

END

Holocaust Memory

HIST 05449:

Without remembrance of the past there is no present nor future. Therefore, this course seeks to unpack and scrutinize
memor(ies)y by examining Holocaust Memory specifically in its various forms and representations. We will begin with
deliberation upon the scientific progression of memory studies and its historical development within the European context.
While individual, collected, and commemorative Holocaust Memory will remain the focus, particular attention will be paid
to how certain national and cultural identities shape and rely on Holocaust history and memory. More important, this
upper-level seminar aims to challenge monolithic Holocaust Memory paradigms.

END

History of Childhood & Youth in America

HIST 05450:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306 or AMST 13301

This course will explore the history of childhood and youth in America. Major topics include family formations, work,
education, children and the state, adolescence, generational tensions, and especially the effects of gender, class, race,
ethnicity, religion, and geographically diversity. This course may not be offered annually.

END

History of Human Rights in Latin America

HIST 05451:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306 or IS 25300

This course will explore the history of human rights across Latin America in the twentieth century. Major topics of study
include repression and activism during the Cold War, the role of transnational social movements and U.S. foreign policy,
and the explosion of social and economic rights activism at the end of the twentieth century, including causes such as
women’s rights, indigenous rights, LGBTQ rights, and reproductive rights. This course may not be offered annually.

END

US HISTORY 1820-1861

HIST 05452:

Prerequisites: HIST 05150 and (HIST 05299 or HIST 05306 or AMST 13301)

This course analyzes American society and culture from 1820 to 1861 against the background of industrialization, urban
development, westward movement, political campaigns, religious revivals, and evolving gender roles, race relations, and
social classes. The course will also focus on the growth of the American Empire, the impact of Jacksonian democracy, and
the emergence of sectional politics. This course may not be offered annually.

END

The Gilded Age And Progressive Era, 1877-1914

HIST 05453:

Prerequisites: (HIST 05306 or AMST 13301) and HIST 05151

During the Gilded Age and Progressive Era, the United States made a critical transition from a nation that was largely
agrarian, rural, and relatively ethnically homogenous to one that was industrial, urban, and ethnically diverse. Students will
apply a variety of historical methods to examine the United State's late nineteenth and early twentieth century
transformation into a modern society characterized by dynamic politics and fluid cultural forms. This course may not be
offered annually.

END

America From War To War, 1914-1945

HIST 05454:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306 or AMST 13301

This course will focus on the federal government's role in the economy and in social life and the restructuring of the
American racial, gender, and ethnic systems. A central focus of the course is the development of a mass production economy
and the attendant rise of consumerism and media influence that characterized the era between the wars. This course may
not be offered annually.

END

History Of The American West

HIST 05471:

Prerequisites: HIST 05150 and ( HIST 05306 or AMST 13301)

This course considers the settlement and economic development of the American West from the arrival of Europeans in
the sixteenth century to the present. Among the topics considered will be: the role of the frontier in American history; the
settlement of the region first by Native Americans and later by Europeans, Africans, and Asians; conflicts between
Europeans and Native Americans; Manifest Destiny and American expansionism; the Gold Rush; vigilantism; women and
the frontier experience; farming on the Great Plains; Mexican immigration; high technology and the economy of the
modern West; and the frontier in the American imagination. This course may not be offered annually.

END

U.S. Labor History

HIST 05474:

Prerequisites: ( HIST 05150 or HIST 05151 ) and ( HIST 05306 or AMST 13301 )

This course examines the changing nature of the work and working conditions and the workers' efforts to find their place
in the American economy from colonial times to the era of the Wagner and Taft-Hartley Acts, with special attention to
workers' organizations. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Seminar

HIST 05492:

Prerequisites: Senior Status and HIST 05306 w/C- or better, at least 9 credits in 300-400 level history courses.

This course concentrates on a research paper of substantial length based upon primary as well as secondary sources. The
course also requires critical analysis and discussion of the papers by seminar participants. Required of History majors during
their senior year.

END

Independent Study

HIST 05493:

This course provides an opportunity to pursue individual specialized historical topics under the guidance of a staff
member. This course may not be used as substitute for a course offered by the Department. This course may not be offered
annually.

END

Internship In History

HIST 05495:

Prerequisites: HIST 05306 or AMST 13301

This course will introduce students to public history by placing them with a public history agency such as an historic site,
museum, library, historical society, archives, or similar institution, where they will serve as interns for a minimum of 120
hours during the semester. The students will acquire practical experience in such work as historic preservation, exhibit
design and production, library and archives cataloging, journal editing, and museum education. This course may not be
offered annually.

END

Interdisciplinary Case Studies in the Liberal Arts

INTR 20390:

This course will engage students in a team-based project through which they will research a timely, interdisciplinary issue
using skills learned in their major. Students will have an opportunity to apply the relevant aspects of their major to the case
study at hand. The design of the course will allow for guest speakers and targeted instruction to aid students in
understanding the case and forming their solution. The course will culminate in a showcase through which students will
present their case study solution to a panel of judges. This course is restricted to majors in the College of Humanities &
Social Sciences.

END

Global Challenges

IS 25100:

This online course examines seven key worldwide trends identified by the former Center for Strategic and International
Studies: Population, Resources, Technology, Information, Economies, Conflict, and Governance. Students explore current
and future issues related to these global challenges in over 50 countries, as well as international and global contexts. All
majors are welcome.

END

Research Methods in International Studies - WI

IS 25300:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or ENGL 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This writing intensive course will introduce International Studies majors to the interdisciplinary field of international
studies, develop students' critical thinking and methodological skills, familiarize students with different perspectives and
aspects of globalization, and acquaint students with major trends and themes in global affairs today.

END

Global Security Clinic

IS 25310:

This course provides an interdisciplinary introduction to global security, linking international security to selected health,
environment, and emergency response themes and incorporating hands-on project-based learning. Designed to combine
theory, method and empirical content from different disciplines, it surveys a wide-range of topics including environmental
disaster, poverty, migration, displacement, and health crises.

END

Special Topics in International Studies

IS 25350:

Prerequisites: IS 25300 or COMP 01112 and Permission of instructor or International Studies coordinator

This upper-level course will give students the opportunity to examine a range of different issues and themes related to
International Studies. The precise topic will change from semester to semester based on faculty expertise and preferences
and on student demand.

END

Senior Seminar in International Studies

IS 25400:

Prerequisites: IS 25.300 and Senior standing.

Students in this capstone course for International Studies majors will write a research paper of substantial length that is
comparative in approach, international in context and content, and applies interdisciplinary approaches to global problems
and issues. The paper should be informed by important and recent scholarly works drawn from at least three fields, defend a
substantive thesis, and extensively use various types of primary sources.

END

HONR 01101:

Leadership and Service Training

END

Principles & Pedagogies in the Inclusive Classroom

HONR 02210:

Prerequisites: Admission to Bantivoglio Honors Concentration

In lieu of punitive, rapid-suppression approaches to concerning behavior, this course introduces educational principles and
pedagogies that promote the use of positive, universal classroom management techniques supportive of all learners in an
inclusive setting. Students will be empowered to: articulate common academic language as it relates to the cycle of teaching
and learning; create connections between educational philosophies, beliefs, and dispositions; and embrace universal,
proactive supports and strategies for creating effective learning communities to promote a positive school climate. The
Honors section will explore the ways critical pedagogies can illuminate social justice issues that are often invisible in school
settings. Students will conduct original research on contemporary social issues that affect learners both in and outside the
classroom.

END

Honors: Participation

HONR 05101:

Prerequisites: Admitted to the Bantivoglio HonorsConcentration.

This is a non-credit Honors course in which all Honors Concentration students are enrolled each semester. The course is
graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. Each Honors student will complete a portfolio of her/his extracurricular activities in the
areas of educational enhancement, service and social activities in accordance with the Honors Concentration requirements.
The portfolio will consist of a one-page summary of each of the extracurricular educational, service and social activities in
which the student participated during the past semester.

END

Mathematics

HONR 05180:

Prerequisites: Admitted to the Bantivoglio Honors Concentration or have a GPA of 3.00 or higher

This is a lower level general education course which provides the student with a working knowledge of the foundations of
mathematics. Basic concepts and principles in the philosophy of mathematics and mathematical logic, including set theory,
and the concept of infinity and proof will be explored. Mathematical applications form a major portion of the course.

END

Songs of Praise, Songs of Protest

HONR 05200:

This course will examine the ways in which music has served as an instrument for social change. African-American music in
the form of Spirituals and Blackface Minstrelsy will provide a mechanism for exploring social change, tensions between
races, confused dynamics of racial identity, and stereotypes. Hymns of the late 18th and early 19th century will demonstrate
how women used song as a means of self-expression denied them in other spheres. Finally, the civil rights and protest songs
of the 60s and 70s will provide a backdrop for exploring issues of race and social culture.

END

Biology, History, and the Fate of Human Society

HONR 05202:

This course will focus on the issues in Jared Diamond's Pulitzer Prize-winning Guns, Germs, and Steel (1997). Diamond's
thesis is that history "followed different courses for different peoples because of differences among people's environments,
not because of biological differences among peoples themselves." (p. 25) Thus, human societies on different continents
developed food production, writing, animal domestication, immunity to certain infectious diseases, and various technologies
at different times (if they developed them at all), largely as a consequence of geography and the distribution of plants and
animals (biogeography). This course investigates Diamond's argument, compares it to alternative explanations for
differences in the development of societies, and allows independent student research that will test Diamond's hypotheses.

END

Principles of Personal Finance

HONR 05208:

Personal financial planning is an essential tool to help us achieve financial objectives throughout our lifetimes. Successful
financial planning, via defining financial goals and developing appropriate strategies to achieve them, brings rewards such as
wise spending habits, increased wealth, and an improved standard of living. The goal of this course is to teach Honors
students the basic personal financial planning tools they will need to take charge of their personal finances, and to control
their financial resources more efficiently. The topics that will be covered include the psychology of decision making, time
value of money, managing assets and credit, principles of taxation, managing insurance needs, making investment decisions,
preparing for retirement, and estate planning.

END

Artistic And Creative Experience

HONR 05214:

Prerequisites: Admitted to the Bantivoglio Honors Concentration or have a GPA of 3.00 or higher

This is an interdisciplinary general education course which will fulfill a Rowan Experience artistic and creative experience
requirement. The course will utilize an interdisciplinary approach to the study of the various types of fine and performing
arts including art, music, theatre and dance, and radio/TV/film.

END

Literature

HONR 05217:

Prerequisites: Admitted to the Bantivoglio HonorsConcentration or have a GPA of 3.00 or higher

This is an interdisciplinary general education course which will fulfill a Rowan Experience literature requirement. The
course will utilize an interdisciplinary approach to the study of the literature with the goals of increasing students'
understanding and enjoyment of various types of literature including drama, novel, poetry and short story. The content and
pedagogy of the course is qualitatively and quantitatively designed to meet the intellectual needs of Honors students. Topics
will vary each semester and will be interdisciplinary in content and/or methodology. This course will satisfy the University's
general education "literature" requirement.

END

Natural Science

HONR 05285:

Prerequisites: Admitted to the Bantivoglio Honors Concentration or have a GPA of 3.00 or higher

This is an interdisciplinary general education course which can be taken by honors students as a Natural Science Rowan
Experience course. It permits students to explore the natural sciences from a problem-oriented perspective. Students are
encouraged to examine evidence and assess scientific theories critically.

END

HONR 05301:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

This course is for students completing an Honors Capstone Proposal supervised by a faculty member.

Honors Capstone Proposal

END

Teaching the Holocaust: History and Memory

HONR 05306:

Prerequisites: Admission to Bantivoglio Honors Concentration

Using primary source materials, students explore the history of Holocaust and then examine the ways the Holocaust is
remembered and memorialized in the United States, Europe, and Israel. Students will also contemplate understandings of
childhood and will learn about pedagogical theories and practices for appropriately sharing this material with K-12 students.

END

Honors History: American Engineering in the Cold War

HONR 05307:

Prerequisites: Admission to Bantivoglio Honors Concentration

This course explores how engineers uniquely affected the Cold War (~1945-1989) given Washington policymakers’ use of
engineers to execute large-scale development projects, initiate defense programs, and even begin an aerospace program to
reach outer space. Students will read primary and secondary source materials to form evidence-based opinions on how
technology and engineering can be credited (or blamed) with the Cold War’s escalation and eventual end, as well as conduct
targeted research on particular engineering projects that had significant effects on American domestic and foreign policy.

END

Honors Alternative Course Experience

HONR 05317:

Prerequisites: Permission of instructor

This course is for students completing an approved Honors Alternative Course Experience. The course is for students
conducting active research, which includes graduate coursework or national fellowships, taking part in an internship,
studying abroad, or undertaking Honors contract work with a member of faculty. The student’s proposed activity must be
approved through the Honors Alternative Course Experience application process before they can be enrolled in the class.

END

Selected Topics

HONR 05390:

Prerequisites: Admitted to the Bantivoglio Honors Concentration or have a GPA of 3.00 or higher

This is an upper level interdiscplinary seminar style course that will address itself to topics and problems taken from
various disciplines.

END

Honors Independent Study

HONR 05400:

Prerequisites: Admitted to the Bantivoglio Honors Concentration, four Honors courses and 57 hours completed, approvalby the Honors
Board.

An upper level interdisciplinary course involving an approved Honors Research Assistantship project supervised by a
faculty member.

END

HONR 05401:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

This course is for students completing an Honors Capstone Experience supervised by a faculty member.

Honors Capstone Course

END

HONR 05402:

This course is for students completing an Honors Portfolio as part of the Honors Concentration with Distinction
requirement.

Honors Portfolio

END

Marketing Clinics

HONR 09301:

Prerequisites: Admission to Bantivoglio Honors Concentration

Through experiential learning, marketing students will work collaboratively with students in Engineering clinic, focusing
on the demand side of product development. Marketing students will provide the critical input for feasibility, demand
analysis, competitive analysis, and commercialization for the Engineers’ projects as well as research consumer insights. The
cross-disciplinary nature of the course will help students gain significant skills in multidisciplinary teamwork and
collaboration, communication, problem solving, data analysis, and critical thinking.

END

Cultural Geography: Why Place Matters

HONR 16210:

Prerequisites: Admission to Bantivoglio Honors Concentration

This course introduces students to key concepts and basic methodologies in studying the complex relationships between
people and place, from local to global scales. In exploring why place matters, this course will develop the capacity think
geographically: to investigate how our environment (place) influences culture (what people do) and how human activities in
turn affect the environment. Students will be introduced to key cultural geography concepts and methodologies (e.g. place,
space, landscape, scale, mobility) and will learn to apply these ideas to timely topics and events. This course is intended to
cultivate the capacity to think geographically, a critical twenty-first century skill for informed and empathic global citizens.

END

Curriculum Theories in Urban Education

CASE 90530:

This course is designed for pre-service and in-service teachers currently working in classroom settings and addresses
curriculum theory and basic principles of curriculum and instruction. Through the lenses of curriculum theories and
ideologies, students will examine their own curricular beliefs, from where they came, and how they affect how they teach
and what they teach. Students will work to understand how curricular orientations can affect the experiences of our students
and of ourselves. Using theoretically-oriented lenses, students will also examine the following: race and multicultural issues;
curricular accountability on student achievement, teacher retention, and teacher burnout; and students’ social class as a
possible explanation for achievement.

END

Disability Studies

CASE 90534:

This course explores critical approaches to dis/ability and in/exclusion, including an analysis of shifting social and cultural
constructions of dis/ability through an interdisciplinary exploration of autobiography, narrative, film, legal and policy issues
and research literature.

END

Seminar: Principles and Pedagogies in the Inclusive Classroom

ECED 23211:

Prerequisites: Admission into Early Childhood Program; Corequisites: INCL 02210

This Seminar course serves as the vehicle for domain-specific application of the principles and pedagogies that promotes
the use of positive management techniques supportive of all learners in an inclusive setting. Through case study scenarios,
videos, virtual, and live field experiences, students will have multiple opportunities to reflect on and apply new learning to
enhance their understanding of proactive behavior strategies and supports.

END

ECED 23220:

Contemporary Child in the Family and Community

Prerequisites: ECED 23211 AND INCL 02210: Concurrent Enrollment Allowed. Corequisites: ECED 23320

This course is an overview of inclusive early childhood education focusing on the child in the context of contemporary
families and communities. Through theoretical frameworks such as multiculturalism, critical theory, and sociocultural
theory, candidates will explore diverse historical, political, social, and economic perspectives on contemporary families with
young children, including issues of access and equity within early childhood services and systems. Attention will be given to
understanding racial, socioeconomic, structural, linguistic and faith diversity, as well as exceptionalities in the child, family,
and community contexts and how early childhood systems respond to these trends.

END

Family, Community, And School Relationships

ECED 23221:

Prerequisites: EDUC 01270

This course is designed to heighten teacher candidates' awareness of the roles that family and community have on a child's
success in school. Teacher candidates will learn that all children must be understood in the context of their community
environment, including their families, schools, communities, and the wider society. Teacher candidates will also develop
skills in working effectively with diverse families in the learning community, in order to provide positive educational
outcomes for the child. Clinical classroom visits are required. This course is offered upon special request.

END

Building Brains: Competency and Resiliency

ECED 23320:

Prerequisites: READ 30320 AND ECED 23211 AND INCL 02210; Concurrent Enrollment Allowed. Corequisites: ECED 23220

This course will build upon General Education coursework in Child Development, Human Exceptionality, and
Educational Psychology. Teacher candidates will apply knowledge from these foundational courses, as well as prior courses
on diversity, to understand how young children, birth through age eight, including children with special needs, develop and
learn. This course will highlight a risk and resiliency perspective with a focus on protective factors assessed through
intentional observations and screenings. Teacher candidates will apply theories of child development through formal and
informal observations and in-depth child studies in inclusive classrooms. Emphasis will be made on fostering social and
emotional development and developing resiliency. Teacher candidates will thoughtfully plan developmentally appropriate
learning experiences to foster growth and connect with learning standards. Clinical classroom visits are required.

END

Effective Learning Environments For Diverse Children

ECED 23321:

Corequisites: ECED 23322 Prerequisites: ECED 23320 and READ 30320

Teacher candidates will use and apply knowledge that stems from the previous child development and learning courses to
understand how young school age children, including typical and atypical children, grow and learn from kindergarten
through third grade. Teacher candidates will be able to apply theories of childhood development in the classroom with
direct implications for teaching and learning. Teacher candidates will also be able to use developmentally appropriate
practice as a foundation for planning and making decisions in inclusive primary education settings. Clinical classroom visits
are required. This course is offered in the spring semester only.

END

Planning, Integrating, And Adapting Curriculum: Math And Science

ECED 23322:

Corequisites: ECED 23321; Prerequisites: READ 30320 AND ECED 23311 AND MATH 01201 AND MATH 01301 with Minimum
Grade of C-

This course is designed to enable teacher candidates to understand and plan curriculums for teaching math and science.
This course will start from the perspective of teacher candidates' experiences of learning science and mathematics. They will
reflect on their own prior experiences with math and science and discover the impact of those experiences on their feelings
of efficacy. Teacher candidates will experience teaching strategies and processes that we expect them to master and use in
teaching math and science for young children in inclusive settings. Within an integrated framework, teacher candidates will
develop the conceptual knowledge base for developing a coherent science and mathematics program with developmentally
appropriate learning experiences. Clinical experiences are required.

END

Observation, Assessment, And Evaluation Of Diverse Learners

ECED 23430:

Corequisites: ECED 23431 AND ECED 23432; Prerequisites: ECED 23321 AND ECED 23322

This course provides teacher candidates with a dynamic hands-on exploration of the measurement and evaluation of
children who are in the developmental period known as early childhood. Teacher candidates will learn about standardized
measurement and other types of assessments that are appropriate for young children, including children with special needs.
The tools of authentic assessment including checklists, rating scales, or observations will be used within the candidates’ field
experience in both regular and special education settings. Research into the rationale of assessment of young children will
also be explored. Clinical experiences are required.

END

Planning, Integrating And Adapting Curriculum Across Content Areas

ECED 23431:

Corequisites: ECED 23430 Prerequisites: ECED 23321 and ECED 23322

This curriculum course considers the areas of Social Studies, Music, Movement, Arts, Drama, and Health/Physical
Education as disciplines with a major focus on the integration of curriculum in a rich learning environment. Teacher
candidates will also design learning communities that enhance all aspects of learning, by creating environments that reflect
the learning standards. Further, teacher candidates will learn of facilitating interdisciplinary units and projects within an
early childhood classroom in inclusive settings. Clinical experiences are required.

END

Clinical Practice I in Early Childhood Education

ECED 23432:

Corequisites: ECED 23430

This course allows supervised clinical experiences as part of the first semester of the yearlong residency. The course aims to
support candidates in their application of teaching knowledge and pedagogical skills in the classrooms in which candidates
are placed.

END

Clinical Practice II in Early Childhood Education

ECED 23446:

Corequisites: ECED 23447 and SECD 03350 Prerequisites: ECED 23430 and ECED 23431

The clinical practice experience is a supervised, full-time activity conducted in the early childhood classrooms, PreK to 3rd
grade. In this course, teacher candidates must demonstrate abilities to plan and implement developmentally appropriate
practice for all children, including developing lesson plans, integrating various activities/lessons into the teaching,
accommodating multiple instructional strategies, assessing and documenting learners' performance, building safe and
positive learning environment, managing the classroom, and collaborating with families and other professionals. This is a full
time course in the clinical classroom. This course should be taken in senior year.

END

Early Childhood Education Clinical Seminar

ECED 23447:

Corequisites: ECED 23446 and SECD 03350 Prerequisites: ECED 23430 and ECED 23431

This course is a capstone course for all teacher candidates in the Early Childhood Education Program. The main goals of
this course are to synthesize the pre-service components of the early childhood teacher education in inclusive settings and
to facilitate the transition into the profession. For these goals candidates will have opportunities to reflect on their
understanding of child development and to communicate and collaborate with family and community of both typical and
atypical children, to plan curricula for all children, to assess and document diverse learners' performance and progress, and
to understand professional development of teachers in inclusive settings. They will also develop a professional portfolio.
This course should be taken with Clinical Practice in Early Childhood Education.

END

Learning Communities

EDUC 01102:

This course provides an introduction to the Co-Teach program and learning communities. Through it, students will
develop an understanding of how a learning community operates and what is required to be a successful participant.
Students will also learn and practice the skills of collaboration through classroom and clinical experiences. This course, and
its companion--Foundations of Education--form the foundation on which the rest of the program is built.

END

Teaching: An Introduction To The Profession

EDUC 01104:

This introductory course is designed for students considering a career in teaching, providing students with an introduction
to teaching grades PreKindergarten through 12. Course topics include: the purpose of schools and schooling; diversity, social
justice and equity in schools; state/national standards; curriculum issues and controversies; family/school connections;
teacher dispositions; ethics in education; technology’s impact on schools and schooling; and current trends in education.

END

Literacy, Learning And Curriculum

EDUC 01200:

Prerequisites: EDUC 01102 and EDUC 01103

This course is a continuation of the sequence of courses in the Co-Teach program. This course builds knowledge about
literacy and literacy development as it pertains to regular and special education. The focus of the course is to integrate the
major concepts of curriculum development and literacy. The emphasis will be on the interface between literacy
development and social studies through appropriate curricular planning. An observational clinical classroom experience will
be required.

END

Instructional Planning And Collaboration

EDUC 01300:

Prerequisites: EDUC 01200

This course focuses on developing a thematic unit plan in the area of literacy. Students learn about various instructional
approaches and how to select the best approach for a specific student. Students identify new developments in the field of
technology and their applications in teaching all children. Students participate in a literacy clinic in which they will work
with children experiencing difficulty in some aspect of literacy, related to their clinical classroom placement.

END

Instructional Implementation And Collaboration

EDUC 01301:

Prerequisites: EDUC 01102 and EDUC 01103

During the spring semester, the focus is on instructional implementation and collaboration. Students learn about
collaborative problem-solving models and participate in a problem-solving activity. Students learn how to design, structure
and manage daily classroom routines. They also learn about the principles of action research and develop an action research
project.

END

Teaching In Inclusive Classrooms

EDUC 01400:

Prerequisites: EDUC 01300 and EDUC 01301

This course is designed to enable students in the Collaborative Education major to develop and implement methods for
teaching, managing, and evaluating children with special needs. Students will learn about the impact of specific disabilities
on learning and behavior, the rationale for inclusive education, and academic adaptations for children with special needs.
Students will be responsible for developing and implementing instructional and/or behavior management adaptations in
their clinical classroom placements and reporting on these to the class.

END

Developing And Adapting Instruction In Elementary Classrooms

EDUC 01401:

Prerequisites: EDUC 01300 and EDUC 01301

This course is designed to prepare teacher candidates to use a variety of teaching models and strategies to make
mathematics and science instruction accessible to all students. Instructional standards developed by NCTM and NSTA will
be reviewed. A technology component addressing the use of technology as a tool for teachers and learners will be
incorporated. Issues of equity, curriculum integration, collaboration, and reflection will be emphasized in both course and
field assignments. The course includes a clinical assignment in an inclusion classroom.

END

Developing And Adapting Assessment For All Learners

EDUC 01402:

Prerequisites: EDUC 01300, EDUC 01301 and EDUC 01401

The course emphasizes the link between assessment and instructional decisions for learners at a variety of academic and
functional levels. Prospective classroom teachers will learn how to routinely use curriculum-based and authentic assessment
techniques. Although the emphasis of this course is on informal assessment, an introduction to standardized tests and
statistical factors in testing is included. Teacher candidates will develop informal assessment measures in conjunction with
their clinical classroom placement responsibilities.

END

Seminar: Principles and Pedagogies in the Inclusive Classroom

ELEM 02210:

Corequisites: INCL 02210

This seminar course serves as the vehicle for domain-specific application of the principles and pedagogies that promote the
use of positive management techniques supportive of all learners in an inclusive setting. Through case study scenarios,
videos, virtual and live experiences in Early Childhood, Elementary, Art, Music, and Physical Education instructional
settings, students will have multiple, varied opportunities to reflect on and apply new learning to enhance their
understanding of proactive behavior strategies and supports.

END

Clinical Experience in the Elementary Classroom

ELEM 02308:

Prerequisites: INCL 02250 and INCL 02330 Corequisites: INCL 02310 and INCL 02320 and INCL 02325 and READ 30351

The STREAM I Clinical Experience course serves as the first of two clinically-based experiences during the STREAM
professional courses. This course provides teacher candidates enrolled in the co-req STREAM courses opportunities
to apply educational knowledge, theories, and frameworks across a semester of clinical classroom teaching experience. In
addition, a series of discussions, readings, and course assignments will focus teacher candidates on the teaching cycle of
lesson planning, implementation, assessment, and reflection/revision. In this course, candidates develop and present
evidence of the comprehensive knowledge, skills, and dispositions expected of teaching professionals.

END

Clinical Practice I in Elementary Education

ELEM 02310:

Prerequisites: INCL 02250 or INCL 02350 or INCL 90432 or ELEM 02199 Corequisites: INCL 02320, INCL 02325

The STREAM II Clinical Experience course serves as the second of two clinically-based experiences during the STREAM
professional courses. This course provides teacher candidates enrolled in the co-req STREAM II courses in Science,
Technology, Engineering, Mathematics and Health opportunities to apply educational knowledge, theories, and
frameworks across a semester of clinically-based, classroom teaching experience. In addition, a series of discussions,
readings, and course assignments will focus teacher candidates on the teaching cycle of lesson planning, implementation,
assessment, and reflection/revision. In this course, candidates develop and present evidence of comprehensive knowledge,
skills, and dispositions expected of teaching professionals.

END

Curriculum And Assessment In Elementary Classroom

ELEM 02319:

Prerequisites: EDUC 01272 Minimum Grade C- and READ 30280 Minimum Grade C- and SMED 33420 Minimum Grade C- and
MATH 01201 Minimum Grade B-

This course examines the use of established elementary education content standards in science, social studies, health, and
the arts and how interdisciplinary, thematic units of inquiry facilitate meeting those standards. Current research about the
way children learn and effective teaching is stressed. Students apply research on the way children learn in science, social
studies, health, and the arts, as well as instructional knowledge and skills they are developing related to inquiry- based
instruction, assessment, and differentiating that instruction for elementary students. Building on school district materials
and mandates, teacher candidates plan, teach, and assess an interdisciplinary unit of inquiry, which reflects candidates'
understanding of appropriate content and pedagogy in science, social studies, health, and the arts for the grade and student
in the classroom. Teacher candidates will also review, administer as appropriate, and reflect on results of varied assessments
of student learning that are typically used in that classroom. The course includes a field experience, and assignments are
coordinated with a concurrent course on differentiating instruction.

END

Mathematics Pedagogy For Elementary Teachers

ELEM 02336:

Prerequisites: MATH 01301 with a minimum grade B- Corequisites: ELEM 02338 and READ 3051

This course in mathematics pedagogy for the elementary education candidate focuses on the knowledge and skills essential
for teaching mathematics. Utilizing current research findings about how students develop mathematical concepts and
processes, candidates will develop an understanding of teaching and learning mathematics at the elementary level. Teacher
candidates will develop a repertoire of instructional strategies and will develop and analyze effective mathematics lessons. A
field component is required.

END

Practicum In Mathematics And Literacy

ELEM 02338:

Corequisites: ELEM 02336 and READ 30351 Prerequisites: ELEM 02319 and SPED 08316

This field experience course provides an opportunity for candidates in the Elementary Education Specialization to practice
their developing instructional skills once a week in a K-5 classroom setting. Candidates will work with partners in assigned
classrooms to assist with literacy and mathematics instruction and to take the lead in developing and teaching lessons in
literacy and mathematics.

END

Elementary Education Clinical Practice Seminar

ELEM 02445:

Corequisites: ELEM 02448 SECD 03350

This capstone senior seminar provides elementary education candidates with a supportive atmosphere in which to
synthesize the pre-service components of their academic preparation with actual experience, emerging issues in the field of
education, and their transition into the profession. Candidates develop a philosophy of teaching; gather and present
evidence of their comprehensive knowledge, skills, and dispositions expected in this profession; and demonstrate knowledge
of current critical and contemporary issues facing educators and those who hold a stake in education. Interviewing skills and
a professional portfolio will be developed.

END

Clinical Practice II In Elementary Education

ELEM 02448:

Corequisites: ELEM 02445 and SECD 03350 Prerequisites: INCL 02310 and INCL 02320 and READ 30351 and INCL 02325 and
INCL 02315

The clinical practice experience is a supervised, full-time activity conducted in a public elementary classroom. In this
course, candidates must demonstrate mastery of subject area content, lesson planning, and use of multiple instructional
strategies; ability to assess learner progress, manage all aspects of classroom activity, work collaboratively with all colleagues,
administrators, families, and community, and to document evidence of doing all of the above. This is a full-time field-based
course taken in the senior year.

END

Characteristics of Knowledge Acquisition

FNDS 21230:

This course will focus on how human beings think, process information and acquire skills. Discussion of learning
philosophies and applications in a variety of settings will be addressed. Methods of inquiry, reflection, motivation, creativity
and critical thinking will be explored.

END

International Experiences in Education

INCL 02150:

This course encourages and facilitates global experiences of an educational and cultural nature for students at all stages in
the progression of their university coursework. It will enhance students’ historical, cultural, and social perspectives within
the context of policy, human rights, health, social and educational representations, and technology. This course will be
beneficial for all students in developing their professional dispositions. Students participate in pre-travel orientation
meetings and a post-travel meeting as determined by the destination and the course instructor. In order to receive credit for
the course, students must attend 90% of the pre-travel meetings and the post-travel meeting and submit a final project
which includes reflective summary of their international experience.

END

Context of Education in the Inclusive Classroom

INCL 02200:

This course examines educational philosophies in inclusive and elementary education, psychological influences on
education, and the development of the Standards Movement as these ideas pertain to current educational practices.
Emphasis isi placed on understanding the relationship between theory and practice, and students are required to develop
self-analytic, reflective, problem-solving skills. Through seminal readings and course assignments, students widll explore
how differing philosophies of inclusive education and the associative psychological influences shape elementary learning
communities and approaches for teaching all learners in the classroom.

END

Principles and Pedagogies in the Inclusive Classroom

INCL 02210:

Corequisites: ELEM 02210 or ECED 23211

This course introduces educational principles and pedagogies that promote the use of positive, universal classroom
management techniques supportive of all learners in an inclusive setting. Students will be empowered to: articulate common
academic language as it relates to the cycle of teaching and learning; create connections between educational philosophies,
beliefs, and dispositions; and embrace universal, proactive supports and strategies for creating socially just learning
communities to promote a positive school climate.

END

Foundation of Inclusive Education

INCL 02215:

Prerequisites: SPED 08130

This course is an introduction to the foundations of inclusive education. Students will be asked to critically examine
teaching and schooling, with an emphasis on identifying effective approaches to supporting the meaningful participation
and learning of diverse students. Students will develop a research-based educational philosophy in which they articulate their
plan for creating inclusive classroom environments.

END

STREAM 1: Social Studies, ELA, and the Arts

INCL 02310:

Prerequisites: INCL 02250 and INCL 02330 Corequisites: INCL 02315 and INCL 02320 and INCL 02325and READ 30351

This course explores the use of established elementary education content standards and pedagogical methods in social
studies, English/language arts, and the fine arts, and how interdisciplinary, thematic units of inquiry facilitate meeting those
standards. Students apply current research on how children learn and on effective teaching methods in social studies,
English/language arts, and the fine arts. Students also apply instructional knowledge and skills they are developing related to
inquiry-based, interdisciplinary instruction, assessment, and differentiation in the co-req STREAM I Clinical
Experience course.

END

STREAM II: STEM & Health in the Inclusive Classroom

INCL 02320:

Prerequisites: INCL 02250 and INCL 02330 Corequisites: INCL 02310 and INCL 02325 and INCL 02315and INCL 02335 and
READ 30351

This course focuses on understanding and developing inquiry-based, interdisciplinary instruction based on national and
state standards in science, technology, engineering, mathematics, and health education at the elementary school level.
Students will critically examine the principles of inquiry-based instruction and design-based instruction, develop
interdisciplinary lesson plans, and develop performance-based assessments. Utilizing current research findings about how
students develop STEM & Health concepts and processes, candidates will develop an understanding of teaching and
learning related to STEM & Health disciplines at the elementary level. Teacher candidates will develop repertoire of
instructional strategies and will develop and analyze effective science, technology, engineering, and mathematics and health
instruction.

END

Science Inquiry and Methods for the Inclusive Classroom

INCL 02322:

Prerequisites: INCL 02351 and INCL 02330 and INCL 09432

This course focuses on assessment practices in science education and developing instructional strategies for teaching
science content as a means for achieving scientific literacy and understanding scientific inquiry. Candidates will explore
strands of science including Nature of Science, Science as Inquiry, and Science Outreach and Resources, as well as
Technology & Engineering for Elementary teaching. Candidates will be exposed to a variety of high leverage practices and
science curricula with an emphasis on integrated instruction in a community context and meeting the unique needs of all
learners.

END

Social Studies Methods for the Inclusive Classroom

INCL 02323:

Prerequisites: INCL 02215 and INCL 02330

The course focuses on engaging prospective teachers in inclusive social studies pedagogy in the K-6 inclusive elementary
classroom. The course will equip students with instructional models that will prepare them to teach history and social
sciences integrated with other subjects in the inclusive elementary classroom. This course will emphasize how prospective
teachers might build inclusive social studies assessments using standards from the National Council for Social Studies and
the Common Core State Standards. This course is a required course for students enrolled in the B.A. in Inclusive Education
major.

END

Advanced Mathematics Methods for the Inclusive Classroom

INCL 02324:

Prerequisites: MATH 01201 AND MATH 01301

This is a specialized methods course that addresses topics including pedagogies and strategies for teaching elementary
mathematics to students with a range of needs and characteristics in inclusive classrooms. Students will develop intervention
plans for struggling students based on evidence-based practices in an effort to support diverse learners in the classroom.

END

Mathematics Strategies in the Inclusive Classroom

INCL 02325:

Prerequisites: INCL 02250 and INCL 02330 Corequisites: INCL 02320 and INCL 02335 OR INCL 02322 and READ 30351

This course is designed to help teacher candidates prepare to teach mathematics in diverse, inclusive elementary
classrooms. In order to do that, this course will focus on teaching through inquiry and problem solving, using appropriate
interventions, and shaping the learning environment. The co-req STREAM II Clinical Experience should be
considered a laboratory for this course, where teacher candidates observe, reflect, question, and make connections among
content and pedagogy discussions.

END

Differentiating Instruction in the Inclusive Classroom

INCL 02330:

Prerequisites: SPED 08130 and INCL 02210 and ELEM 02210 Corequisite: INCL 02250

This course focuses on how the diverse needs of individuals with educational disabilities/differences can be met within the
general education classroom environment. Emphasis will be on communication and collaboration with parents and
education professionals, understanding of linguistic and cultural differences, and utilizing instructional strategies in
response to the results of differentiated assessments to meet individual needs.

END

Instruction & Assessment in the Inclusive Classroom

INCL 02350:

Prerequisites: INCL 02210 AND ELEM 02210 AND Corequisites: INCL 02330

This course provides in-depth examination of instructional planning and assessment in the inclusive classroom. Built on
the learning community philosophy developed in Principles and Pedagogies in the Inclusive Classroom, this course is a
broad overview of inclusive elementary education. Standards, philosophies, theories, and teaching and learning principles
that underpin inclusive elementary education are revealed to enable teacher candidates to begin developing a personal
philosophy of how children learn and what teachers need to do to support and assess their learning. Candidates learn to
write lesson plans and incorporate different teaching strategies to enhance student learning. Teacher candidates design,
review, and reflect on results of varied assessments of students learning typically used in the elementary inclusive classroom.
This course includes clinical classroom visits in inclusive urban school settings.

END

Clinical Experience I in Inclusive Education

INCL 02351:

Prerequisites: INCL 02215

This 1 credit Clinical Experience field-based course requires approximately 1 day a week in the field and focuses on
inclusive pedagogy, including: differentiating instruction, implementing principles of Universal Design for Learning and
adapting curriculum and classroom environments to support diverse learners in inclusive settings. The course is designed to
align with the program goals of the BA in Inclusive Education and to accompany INCL02330: Differentiating Instruction in
the Inclusive Classroom. Students develop the skills and have the opportunity to implement their skills in the field to
support a wide range of learners, collaborate with cooperating teachers, as well as support school-based professionals and
families. They learn to implement content-rich interdisciplinary learning experiences which address the learning needs of all
students, utilizing a strengths-based perspective to differentiate and adapt instruction for individual learners. The program
prepares students to create communities of learning based on social justice and culturally relevant pedagogical practice. The
Inclusive Clinical Experience will be designed to present students with opportunities to focus on the practice they are
developing in Differentiated Instruction. This course is required course in the B.A. in Inclusive Education program,
Elementary Education specialization (K-6).

END

Clinical Experience II in Inclusive Education

INCL 02352:

Prerequisites: INCL 02351

This 1 credit Clinical Experience field-based course focuses on inclusive pedagogy, including: differentiating instruction
across content areas, with a particular focus on Social Studies and Science, implementing principles of Universal Design for
Learning and adapting curriculum and classroom environments to support diverse learners in inclusive settings. The course
is designed to align with the program goals of the BA in Inclusive Education and to accompany INCL02323: Social Studies
Methods for the Inclusive Classroom and INCL 02322: Science Inquiry and Methods for the Inclusive Classroom. Students
build on the skills they have been developing in coursework and through INCL 02351: Clinical Experience I in Inclusive
education and have the opportunity to implement their skills in the field to support a wide range of learners, collaborate
with cooperating teachers, school-based professionals, and families. This course is required course in the B.A. in Inclusive
Education program, Elementary Education specialization (K-6).

END

Diversity Seminar

INCL 02440:

Prerequisites: ELEM 02448 (may be taken concurrently) or INCL 02445 (may be taken concurrently)

This Diversity Seminar is a capstone course in the Elementary Education program and will help teacher candidates
enrolled in clinical practice reflect upon and better understand their practitioner experiences through a series of discussions,
readings, and course assignments. In this course, candidates develop a philosophy of teaching; gather and present evidence
of their comprehensive knowledge, skills, and dispositions expected in this profession; and demonstrate knowledge of
current critical and contemporary issues facing educators and other stakeholders in education.

END

Clinical Practice I in Inclusive Education

INCL 02444:

Prerequisites: INCL 02215, INCL 90432, and SPED 08307

Clinical Practice I is the first field-based course of the Clinical Practice Year for Inclusive Education Major. It is a
supervised, 2-3 days a week internship conducted in a public elementary inclusive classroom. In this course, candidates will
work with cooperating teachers and supervisors to plan lessons, use multiple instructional and assessment strategies; manage
classroom activity; work collaboratively with colleagues, administrators, families, and community; and provide evidence
documenting teaching tasks.

END

Clinical Practice II in Inclusive Education

INCL 02445:

Prerequisites: INCL 02215 and INCL 90432

The Clinical Practice experience is the second field-based course of the Clinical Practice Year for Inclusive Education
Major. It is a supervised, full-time activity conducted in a public early childhood or elementary inclusive classroom. In this
course, candidates must demonstrate mastery of subject area content, lesson planning, and use of multiple instructional
strategies and ability to assess learner progress; manage all aspects of classroom activity; work collaboratively with
colleagues, administrators, families, and community; and document evidence of doing all of the above. This is a full-time
field-based course taken in the senior year.

END

Working with Families and Communities

INCL 90432:

Prerequisites: INCL 02215

This course is designed to heighten inclusive education teacher candidates' and the CUGS for Teaching in Urban and
Diverse Settings students' awareness of the roles that family and community have on a child's success in school. The course
situates students' communities and families from an asset-based perspective, demonstrating that all children must be
understood in the context of their community environment, including their families, schools, communities, and the wider
society. Students will also develop skills in working effectively with diverse families in the learning community, in order to
provide positive educational outcomes for children in inclusive settings.

END

Effective Inclusive Instruction

SELN 10576:

This course is designed to begin developing the knowledge, skills, and dispositions necessary for general education teachers
to understand and educate students in inclusive classrooms. Emphasis will be on: (a) understanding the legal foundations for
inclusive instruction, (b) recognizing students' diverse strengths and needs, (c) designing, implementing, and assessing
effectively differentiated lessons that feature research-based strategies, and (d) organizing and managing a flexible,
student-centered classroom.

END

Inclusive Instruction in STEM Classrooms

SELN 60576:

Prerequisites: B- or higher in: STEM 60501, READ 30520, STEM 60510 Corequisites: STEM 60502 and STEM 60512

With a focus on STEM education for students with special needs, this course is designed to begin developing the
knowledge, skills, and dispositions necessary for STEM teachers to understand and education students in inclusive
classrooms. Emphasis will be on: (a) understanding the legal foundations for inclusive instruction, (b) recognizing students'
diverse strengths and needs, (c) designing, implementing, and assessing effectively differentiated lessons that feature
research-based strategies, and (d) organizing and managing a flexible, student-centered classroom.

END

SMED 40477:

Effective Inclusive Instruction in English, Social Studies, and World Language
Classrooms

Prerequisites: EDUC 01272 and SPED 08130; Corequisites: SMED 50330 or SMED 51330 or SMED 52330

In this course, candidates will learn how to identify the learning difficulties of students with exceptional learning needs in
inclusive, subject-matter content classes. They will also learn to assess, plan, and teach these students using evidence-based
practices.

END

Teaching Students with Autism Spectrum Disorder

SPED 02340:

Prerequisites: SPED 08130 and SPED 08360

This undergraduate course focuses on the instruction and assessment of students with autism spectrum disorders. Students
will learn about evidence-based practices for enhancing the academic, social, behavioral, and communication skills of P-16
learners with autism spectrum disorders. Students will apply this learning in both in-class study activities and across clinical
experiences. In addition to specialized practices, students will learn how to modify instruction in general education classes
to meet the needs of students with autism spectrum disorders.

END

Disability as Diversity

SPED 08130:

This general education course is designed to foster students' critical thinking about disability and ableism grounded in
disability studies, critical pedagogy and social justice education. Students will examine social and cultural foundations of
oppression, learn to disrupt ableism and to position themselves as agents of social change working to build inclusive
communities.

END

Assessment in Special and Inclusive Education

SPED 08307:

Prerequisites: SPED 08130

This course emphasizes linking assessment with educational instruction in inclusive and special education. Prospective
classroom teachers will learn how to routinely utilize formal and informal assessments to support all students in various
inclusive settings. Teacher candidates will also have the opportunity to develop and demonstrate competencies related to
assessment in conjunction with a required field experience component.

END

Assistive Technology And Transition Planning

SPED 08308:

Prerequisites: SPED 08130

This course focuses on exposing teacher candidates to a variety of accessible and assistive technologies. Students will gain
hands-on skills in selecting and designing technology-based instructional materials for students with a wide range of
instructional and communication needs. Teacher candidates will also explore transition planning across the educational
continuum. Teacher candidates will also have the opportunity to develop and demonstrate competencies related to assistive
technology and transition planning in conjunction with a required field experience component.

END

Differentiated Instruction In The Inclusive Classroom

SPED 08316:

Prerequisites: SPED 08130

This Junior Level (300) course will focus on how the diverse needs of individuals with educational disabilities/differences
can be met within 
the general education classroom environment. Emphasis will be on developing
communication/collaboration, instructional and assessment strategies that will assist the classroom teacher in diversifying
instruction to meet individual needs. A field component is required.

END

SPED 08325:

Pract Spec Ed I

END

SPED 08326:

Pract Spec Ed II

END

Workshop In Special Education

SPED 08330:

This course provides instruction in current issues and topics related to the field of special education which are compatible
with the student's pre-reqs and interest. The course can be designed to meet the in-service needs of agencies and/or
local school systems. Number of credits will be determined by course content each time the course is offered. Students
should consult current registration booklet for the topic and the specific number of credits to be offered.

END

TOSD Clinical Experience I

SPED 08350:

Corequisites: SPED 08360 and SPED 08307

This course serves as the field placement for SPED 08308 and SPED 08415. Students must complete the field requirements
of those in a classroom that includes students with low incidence special needs.

END

TOSD Clinical Experience II

SPED 08351:

Corequisites: SPED 08308 and SPED 08415

This course serves as the field placement for SPED 08308 and SPED 08415. Students must complete the field requirements
of those courses in a classroom that includes students with low incidence special needs.

END

Positive Behavioral Support Systems

SPED 08360:

Prerequisites: SPED 08130

This course exposes teacher candidates to a variety of theoretical approaches in behavior support of students. Students will
develop an individual support plan and explore multi-tiered class-wide and school-wide behavior support systems to support
all students. Teacher candidates will also have the opportunity to develop and demonstrate competencies related to positive
behavior intervention supports in conjunction with a required field experience component.

END

Specialized Instruction For Students With Exceptional Learning Needs

SPED 08415:

Prerequisites: SPED 08130 and SPED 08316 and SPED 08307

This senior-level course enhances the systematic progression of skills initiated during the earlier stages of the Teacher of
Students with Disabilities Endorsement Program. The course prepares candidates to teach students with exceptional
learning needs, covering instructional methods and strategies to teach self-help, motor, reading, math, language, study skills,
science, and social studies. The course also emphasizes supporting students with exceptional learning needs in inclusive
classrooms. There is a required field experience component with this course.

END

SPED 08416:

Specialized Instruction For Students With Exceptional Learning Needs II (K To
Grade 12)

Prerequisites: SPED 08316

This senior-level course enhances the systematic progression of skills initiated during the earlier stages of the Teacher of
Disabilities Program. The course prepares canidates with Subject Area Specialization to teach children from Kindergarden
thru 12th grade with exceptional learning needs, covering instructional methods and strategies to teach self-help, motor,
reading, math, language, study skills, science, and social studies. The course also emphasizes supporting students with
exceptional learning needs in inclusive classrooms. There is a required, supervised field experience component with this
course.

END

Clinical Seminar in Specialized Education

SPED 08445:

Prerequisites: SPED 08415

This course exposes teacher candidates to how to modify, adapt and supplement general education curricula for students
with and without disability labels. Students will develop lesson plans and create cross-curricular modifications in order to
create multiple access points for all students. Teacher candidates will also have the opportunity to develop and demonstrate
competencies related to specialized instruction in conjunction with a required field experience component.

END

Clinical Practice In Special Education

SPED 08450:

Prerequisites: SPED 08415 or SPED 08416

This is the culminating field experience for candidates seeking a Teacher of Disabilities Endorsement. Clinical Practice
provides candidates with full-time placement in a classroom setting that serves students with disability labels. Under
university supervision and working with a collaborating teacher or mentor, candidates assume full responsibility for
planning, teaching, and managing a classroom during this placement.

END

Cerebral Palsy: Its Individual And Community Problems

SPED 19410:

Prerequisites: SPED 08326

This course presents a focus on a comprehensive multi-disciplined approach to the diagnosis and habilitation of the
cerebral palsied individual. It covers the roles of the medical, psychological, therapeutic, social work and rehabilitation
professions to assist teachers to provide appropriate instructional programs.

END

Healthcare Management

DA 03520:

Prerequisites: Graduate standing or permission of the instructor.

This course provides a comprehensive overview of the healthcare management field. Students will be introduced to
organizational behavior theories as well as organizational behavior issues specific to the healthcare industry. Students will
gain an understanding of the major functions, roles, and responsibilities of those working in healthcare management,
including resource and technology management. Students will also gain an appreciation for the legal and ethical issues
inherent in healthcare management.

END

Introduction to Emergency Management and Homeland Security

DPEM 00101:

This course presents comprehensive overview of the discipline of Emergency Management and Homeland Security.
Attention to mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery will be emphasized. An analysis of past disasters will be
presented along with their impacts on policy formation leading up to the current FEMA all-hazards approach. The role,
duties, and importance of the Emergency Management professional will be discussed throughout the semester. Moreover, a
discussion of ethical issues and career options will be presented.

END

Critical Infrastructure in Emergency Management and Homeland Security

DPEM 00310:

Prerequisites: DPEM 00101

This course introduces students to the methods and approaches to protecting critical infrastructure as a means of
effectively protecting people, physical entities and cyber systems and the establishment of an effective incident command
operation. Moreover, students will examine vulnerability rise reduction strategies, contingency planning, and strategic
partnership models as they are applied to the critical infrastructure sectors. Course topics include risk assessment and
management, contingency planning, training and exercises, the role of the crisis management team, crisis communications,
and public and private sector roles and relationships in emergency management.

END

Disaster Planning, Mitigation and Recovery

DPEM 00400:

The purpose of Disaster Planning, Mitigation and Recovery is to introduce the concepts and skills of hazard mitigation
and recovery planning, vulnerability risk analysis, and implementation of a community-wide program disaster preparedness
plan, and to relate them to hazard planning and mitigation processes of disaster planning. Students will design an exercise,
identify the logistics necessary for execution and management of the exercise, and develop an exercise evaluation plan. The
course instruction will follow and meet the guidelines established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency exercise
design and evaluation courses and the Department of Homeland Security Exercise and Evaluation Program.

END

Public Leadership in Crisis Management & Communications

DPEM 00410:

This course provides an overview of political and organizational leadership in crisis situations by addressing prevention of
potential crises, mitigation of those that do occur, and recovery and restoration in the wake of a crisis. Students learn why
effective crisis preparation and response are crucial, how to handle internal and external communications, and which
leadership qualities are essential for effectively managing a crisis.

END

Introduction To Social Science

INTR 01102:

This is an interdisciplinary general education course intended to introduce social science thinking, concepts and methods.
The course describes the core social science disciplines and their typical methods and examines the common themes of self,
society and power through readings selected from such prominent contributors to social science as Sigmund Freud, Erving
Goffman, Ruth Benedict, and Karl Marx.

END

ROWAN 101: COLLEGE SUCCESS-RS

INTR 01107:

Prerequisites: None

This course provides support during freshman students' transition to college level work; engagement with the Rowan
community; and planning for major and career. Included among many topics are discussions of academic skills, identity and
diversity, academic integrity, and financial literacy.

END

Financial Wellness: Planning for Personal Financial Success

INTR 01108:

This course will enable students to understand, manage, and plan for their financial lives during their college years and
beyond. Students will learn about concepts related to personal finance including budgeting, setting financial goals,
understanding debt, and implementing strategies to prepare for their future and gain tools to better navigate the
complexities of personal finances.

END

Biology, History, And Human Societies

INTR 01120:

This course explores the ultimate causes of differences in the development of human societies over approximately the last
13,000 years. Students will be introduced to the methods of two disciplines, history and evolutionary biology. This course
will reveal the importance of an interdisciplinary approach for addressing a major question in human history: why did early
societies on different continents develop at different rates?

END

Introduction to Women's and Gender Studies

INTR 01130:

An introduction to Women's and Gender Studies, this course surveys the field, focusing on how both men and women are
depicted and represented in culture: in the arts, in popular media, in the sciences and in psychology, sociology and history.
This interdisciplinary course probes questions of sex roles, sexism in language, stereotyping in society.

END

Biology, History, And The Fate Of Human Societies

INTR 01132:

This course explores the ultimate causes of differences in the development of human societies over approximately the last
13,000 years. Students will be introduced to the methods of two disciplines history and evolutionary biology. This course
will reveal the importance of an interdisciplinary approach for addressing a major question in human history: why did early
societies on different continents develop at different rates.

END

Readings In American Democracy

INTR 01134:

This course will acquaint students with the theoretical and intellectual underpinnings of American democracy by providing
opportunities to read, respond to, discuss, and write about seminal American political literature from diverse times and
perspectives.

END

Gateway To Asia

INTR 01136:

Combining visual presentations with other innovative pedagogical methods, this course offers an introduction to various
aspects of Asian culture, ranging from philosophy, history, and social structure to literature, martial arts, and family and
gender relations. Students will not only learn and discuss important issues related to the study of Asian cultural
developments and the Asian American experiences, they will also acquire first hand experience through field trips, live
demonstrations, and the exchange of ideas in and outside the class.

END

Issues In Sustainable Development

INTR 01138:

This course is an introduction to local and global sustainability challenges. The course will discuss the environmental
dimensions of development at the local and global level addressing issues such as resource use, greenhouse gas emissions, and
population growth. The course will also focus on technological solutions to sustainable development.

END

Diverse Approaches To Environmental Literature

INTR 01140:

This is a multidisciplinary course that addresses the understanding of diversity of selected environmental issues at local,
regional and global settings and in a historical context through the reading of literature pieces. The selected readings will
help students to understand today's environmental challenges, and to think about the profound ethical, political, economic,
religious, and technological implications of these challenges.

END

Three Generations Of Family Life: Diversity And Democracy Through Family

INTR 01142:

Using the concepts of diversity and democracy as the common unifying scheme, students will employ a sociological
perspective to explore the macro level changes in the family as an institution as well as the parallel micro level changes in the
life of their own families. The historical period under examination extends from 1880 to 1970 and ,thus, captures
approximately three generations of family life. The changes in family life will be explored within the larger context of the
political, economic and social changes that characterize the historical period under examination.

END

Human Ecology: An Evolutionary Approach

INTR 01144:

This course will take an evolutionary approach to understand how the environment has shaped biological and cultural
changes in humans, and how humans have and are continuously impacting the environment. The emphasis of this course will
be to understand the biological, cultural and environmental diversity that has emerged through human history and its impact
in the intricate interactions among humans and between humans and their environment.

END

Environmental Ethics: Through The Lens Of Diversity

INTR 01148:

This is a multidisciplinary course that addresses ethical issues and concerns regarding the environment; the relationships
between individual, society and the natural environment; the importance of different attitudes and world-views for
understanding and responding to environmental challenges; and the need for changes in those attitudes and world-views.
Students will be encouraged to think about the profound ethical, political, economic, religious, and technological
implications of these environmental challenges.

END

Language, Rhetoric, And Propaganda: The Weapons Of The Cold War

INTR 01150:

This course introduces students to knowledge of the political, social, economic and cultural history of the Cold War.
Students will learn to critically and rhetorically analyze scholarly writing and decipher and evaluate primary source
documents relating to the history of the Cold War.

END

Beyond Face Value: Critical Analysis Of Texts And Images

INTR 01152:

This is an interdisciplinary course that addresses the social construction of identity from three interconnected, disciplinary
perspectives: literature, art and gender studies. This class will teach students how to read stories and images critically in
order to uncover the often hinder ways certain aspects of lived identity are presented and/or experienced as "natural" when
they, in fact, are constructed by the society in which we live.

END

Emotions In Organizations

INTR 01154:

This course will consider the role of emotions in organizational settings. Attention will be paid to the nature of emotions,
emotional expression, and perceptions of emotions. Factors related to emotions, including cultural and individual diversity
will be addressed throughout the course.

END

Freedom And Artistic Expression In 20th Century America

INTR 01156:

This course is designed to help students understand what free speech is, the legal limits on free speech, and current debates
on free speech. Additionally, students will come to understand aesthetics, aesthetics as related to the arts, and how
aesthetics changed as America into and through the 20th century. Specifically, this course will enable the students to see
how specific art works comment on current events or are a reaction to the suppression of speech/expression and how artists
have be subjected to control while pursuing their arts in the United States during the 20th century. The course will also help
students appreciate diversity by studying various works of art and various artists, and will help students understand
democracy by examining free speech and related issues in art and artistic expression.

END

INTR 01158:

From Nancy Drew To Lara Croft: Historical And Critical Dimensions Of The Female Detective Genre

This course analyzes historic and multi-cultural constructions of the female detective/action figure in literature, motion
pictures, and video games. Students will confront a variety of texts in order to increase their awareness of how cultural
assumptions come into play and often unconsciously influence their reading and viewing of texts. The course will culminate
in the development and implementation of a cooperatively devised critical thinking rubric, which allows students to more
critically analyze textual and visual media.

END

INTR 01160:

Growing Up Female In 20th Century America: Historical And Psychological Perspectives

This course combines the historical and psychological approaches to female adolescence in the 20th century America from
a multicultural perspective. Its topics include the historical development of adolescence, theories of adolescent
development, and representations of female adolescence.

END

The Leadership Of Ideas

INTR 01162:

The college experience includes constant engagement with new and challenging ideas. This course explores how little ideas
become big and public ideas by drawing on the knowledge and experiences students bring to college. The course will focus
on the learning mechanisms for expanding those ideas. The intent is to enhance the student's academic experience by
exploring critical thinking skills and developing concrete strategies that lead to lifelong learning success.

END

Science Fiction As A Gateway To Human Diversity

INTR 01164:

This course will explore the intersection between the ways in which scientific theories (especially evolutionary and genetic
ones) are used to justify or reduce discrimination in human societies and the hypothetical exploration of similar issues in
science fiction literature. Students will critically examine examples of utopian and dystopian science fiction and investigate
how such writings can inform our thinking about current, real-world diversity issues.

END

Rhetoric Of Music - Rs

INTR 01166:

This course examines the rhetoric of music with particular emphasis given to the rhetorical aspects of music's aural,
non-discursive elements. The course will consider how there elements functioned in diverse cultures and political systems
from antiquity to the twentieth century.

END

What'S Wrong With Normal? - Rs

INTR 01168:

This course will address the topic of the body and physical difference as it is theorized in Disability Studies. As a Rowan
Seminar, special attention will be paid to basic skills and critical inquiry. Particular topics will include Deaf culture,
Supercrips, Accessibility, the ADA, images of disability and resistance to normative structures of emobodiment.

END

Law And Order - Rs

INTR 01170:

This course explores the three components of the criminal justice system: police, courts, and corrections, based on our
understanding of Nature's order. In particular, it presents the case for taking a mathematical and scientific approach to
dealing with many of the issues facing our criminal justice system today: racial profiling, affirmation action hiring, cost of
crime, cost effectiveness of prevention and rehabilitation programs, admissibility of evidence, standards of proff,
incarceration policies. These issues will provide context for developing mathematical proficiencies such as calculating
means, percentages, and rates of change; representing quantitative informationg visually; and making predictions by
extrapolating from existing data. The underlying theme will be to quantitatively analyze whether our legal policies reflect
and protect the interests of diverse groups in our society pertaining to issues of social order, civil liberties and fairness.

END

Songs Of Praise/Protest - Rs

INTR 01172:

This course will examine the ways in which music has served as an instrument for social change. African-American music in
the form of Spirituals and Blackface Minstrelsy will provide a mechanism for exploring social change, tensions between
races, confused dynamics of racial identity, and stereotypes. Hymns of the late 18th and early 19th century will demonstrate
how women used song as a means of self-expression denied them in other spheres. Finally, the civil rights and protest songs
of the 60s and 70s will provide a backdrop for exploring issues of race and social culture.

END

Ethics And The Professions

INTR 01174:

This course will provide students with a critical examination of moral and ethical issues that arise in the context of various
professions. The course will address and seek to bridge conceptual issues with more practical real-life examples. Students
will discuss longstanding philosophical questions concerning social justice, equality, and the place of religion in a diverse
society.

END

Historical Aesthetics Of Suffering

INTR 01176:

The subject of suffering is a universal one, and forces all human beings to acknowledge the commonality of a shared
experience. Yet, while this phenomenon transcends time and place, and is inclusive of all communities and their members,
reponses to, and representations of suffering may, and have, differed greatly. This class is intended to prompt reflection
upon the diversity of questions and answers provoked by suffering in various socio-historical contexts, as preserved in
contemporary accounts, religious and philosophical writings, literature, drama, the visual arts, and music. A detailed
examination of these documents, texts, and performances hopefully will move students from intial, personal understanding
of this complex topic, towards group empathy and cultural sensitivity, as well as fostering appreciation and respect for the
many, and profound ways in which individuals and societies have wrestled with tragedy.

END

In Search Of Democracy: The Quest For Civil Liberties

INTR 01178:

This course will explore critical issues in contemporary civil rights, placing them in their historical, philosohical and
political contexts. Specific issues to be discussed include separation of church and state, freedom of speech, the role of the
federal government in the protection of civil liberties, the right to privacy and its implications for women's reproductive
rights, and Prohibition and its implications for gay marriage and marijuana.

END

Issues In Women'S Health

INTR 01200:

This interdisciplinary course examines issues in women's health. Biological, socio-cultural, psychological, historical and
political processes that shape and define women's health and healthcare experiences will be explored, including the ways in
which medical knowledge has been applied to women.

END

Women, Sex, And Power: A Capstone Seminar In Women'S Studies

INTR 01430:

This capstone seminar will be interdisciplinary in focus with a writing-intensive component. Students in this course will
engage in critical analyses of selected readings on women and gender from six different subject areas, including biology,
history, literature, psychology, philosophy and sociology. Students will study and learn the dominant issues and debates
concerning the study of women and gender within these specific academic disciplines.

END

INTR 01451:

Issues in Business: Directed Research

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 AND COMP 01112 AND BUS 01101

An upper-division course for students in the Liberal Studies: Humanities and Social Sciences, Sequence B Perspectives in
Business, Issues in Business: Directed Research is a course that focuses on the current issues and trends in business as found
in the business media. Through this class, students are able to examine the relationship business trends relate with their
other areas of study. As a writing intensive (WI) course, the course is designed to allow students to explore areas of personal
interest through the collection of research and the presentation of such material in written and spoken formats.

END

Interdisciplinary Materials Science

INTR 01486:

This interdisciplinary course discusses selected topics of current technological importance drawn from the field of
materials science. Three faculty members from different backgrounds in engineering and science will co-teach this course,
offering the students different perspectives to a given topic. The topics are chosen by the faculty and may include
nanotechnology, semiconductors, polymers, inorganic materials, superconductors, fiberoptics, spintronics, and photonics.

END

INTR 01488:

This course will provide students with multifaceted experiences in career planning and development. Students will engage
in self-assessment, career exploration, job search strategies and decision making.

Career Planning And Development

END

INTR 01490:

New Media Practicum

Prerequisites: RTF 03295 and (RTF 03394 or JRN 02321 or CMS 04315)

New Media Practicum provides students with the opportunity to integrate the knowledge they have gathered through the
Concentration in New Media by synthesizing what they have learned into a cohesive and sophisticated project that will be
exemplary of the student's particular strengths and interests. In addition to the experiential benefit of producing the
capstone project, the student is also expected to present the work in such a way that it can serve as part of or a complete
portfolio of new-media work that would be of interest to potential employers, graduate schools, or other interested parties.
Students plan the project with an assigned adviser and meet various agreed-upon milestones throughout the semester.

END

Bachelor Of General Studies Portfolio

INTR 01499:

This course is limited to students enrolled in the General Studies Program.
This course is the portfolio component required for all students in the Bachelor of General Studies Program. Students will
analyze their academic progress through self-reflective assessment.

END

Senior Seminar In Math/Science

INTR 02492:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course provides the opportunity for students to engage in their own research into specific scientific topics and to
significantly advance their own scholarly development in the field. Students will interact with the instructor and the other
students in the seminar in the development and completion of their individual projects. The central theme will vary by
semester. Topics will include case studies of applied and theoretical math and scientific research.

END

Internship In Applied Liberal Arts

INTR 20399:

Prerequisites: 30 credits required

The course will provide formal opportunities and guidance for students seeking to explore the wide variety of careers open
to students with degrees in the humanities and social sciences. Through engaging in an internship, students will explore
careers in the corporate, non-profit, or public sectors. The coursework will engage students in lectures and assignments that
allow for reflection on their internship experience and enhance critical career readiness skills. The course will be offered as
an online class in fall, spring, and summer terms. Students may receive between 2-6 credits depending on the number of
hours the student works.

END

Environmental Internship

INTR 99300:

The internship provides for career-oriented training outside the college under the guidance of a faculty adviser and an
experienced sponsor. Assignments will be based on matching the needs and objectives of the students and sponsors.
Students become involved in work with a community resource group, industry, governmental agency, etc.

END

MILS 01100:

Military Science I Lab

END

Military Science I - Leadership And Personal Development

MILS 01110:

Introduces students/cadets to the personal challenges and competencies that are critical for effective leadership. Focus is
placed on developing basic knowledge and comprehension of the U.S. Army's Leadership Dimensions while gaining a "big
picture" understanding of the Army ROTC program, its purpose in the U.S. Army and our nation, and its advantages for the
student. Classes are conducted for one hour once each week. (No service obligation).

END

Military Science I - Foundations In Leadership

MILS 01120:

Reviews leadership fundamentals such as setting direction, problem solving, listening, presenting briefs, providing
feedback and using effective writing skills. Students/cadets are also exposed to key fundamentals of skills required to be
successful as an MS II cadet; namely, military map reading and land navigation, and small unit operations/ leadership drills.
(No service obligation).

END

American Military History 1650 - Present

MILS 01150:

The focus of the Army Military History Course is to examine the relationship of the military to American society and the
value of military history to the professional officer. The course will cover American military history through the American
Revolution to the current 'War on Terror'. This is a very large span of time to cover in one class, thus not every war, conflict
or interwar period can be touched upon. At the conclusion of this course students will have a basic understanding of major
conflicts in which the United States has been involved, what brought the nation to the decision of war and what the
outcomes were.

END

Military Science II - Innovative Tactical Leadership

MILS 01210:

Prerequisites: MILS 01110 or MILS 01120 Minimum Grade of B

Explores the dimensions of creative and innovative tactical leadership strategies and styles by studying historical case
studies and engaging in interactive student exercises. Focus is on continued development of the knowledge of leadership
values and attributes through an understanding of rank, uniform, customs and courtesies. (No service obligation).

END

Military Science II - Leadership In Changing Environments

MILS 01220:

Prerequisites: MILS 01210, MILS 01110, MILS 01120 andMinimum Grade of B

Examines the challenges of leading in complex contemporary operational environments. Students/cadets are exposed to
more complex land navigation/map reading tasks, as well as more advanced small unit operations/ leadership drills. Cadets
develop greater self awareness as they practice communication and team building skills. (No service obligation).

END

MILS 01310:

Military Science III - Leadership In Contact

Corequisites: MILS 01301 Prerequisites: MILS 01101, MILS 01102, MILS 01201 and MILS 01202

Uses increasingly intense situational leadership challenges to build cadet awareness and skills in leading small units. Skills in
decision-making, persuading, and motivating team members when "in combat" are explored, evaluated, and developed.
(Service obligation incurred upon enrollment in MILS01.310.)

END

Military Science III - Complex Team Leadership Issues

MILS 01320:

Prerequisites: MILS 01310 Minimum Grade of B, MILS 01101, MILS 01102, MILS 01201 and MILS 01202

Challenges cadets with more complex leadership issues to further develop, practice, and evaluate adaptive leadership.
Cadets continue to analyze and evaluate their own leadership values, attributes, skills, and actions in preparation for the
Leadership Development and Assessment Course (LDAC). Primary attention is given to preparation for LDAC and the
development of both tactical skills and leadership qualities.

END

Military Science IV - Developing Adaptive Leaders

MILS 01410:

Corequisites: MILS 01401; Prerequisites: MILS 01310 and MILS 01310 Minimum Grade of B

Develops cadet proficiency in planning, executing, and assessing complex operations, functioning as a member of a staff,
and providing leadership performance feedback to subordinates. Cadets are given situational opportunities to assess risk,
make ethical decisions, and provide coaching to fellow ROTC cadets.

END

Military Science IV - The Army Officer

MILS 01420:

Prerequisites: MILS 01410 Minimum Grade of B

Explores the dynamics of leading in the complex situations of current military operations. Cadets examine differences in
customs and courtesies, military law, principles of war, and rules of engagement in the face of international terrorism.
Aspects of interacting with non-government organizations, civilians on the battlefield, and host nation support are
examined and evaluated.

END

JRN 01407:

SP TOPICS JRN

END

News Media Literacy

JRN 02101:

Well-informed citizens create, maintain, and protect the health of democratic societies. Mediated news, in myriad forms,
constitute the sources of information about society that citizens most often consume. It is therefore vital that members of
society have a keen understanding of how news media function and why, so that they can find, evaluate, and choose the
information they consume wisely. News Media Literacy (JRN 02101) trains students to do just that. Upon completion,
students will be able to identify and explain the historical context of western news media, analyze news texts and artifacts,
critically evaluate evidence and claims presented in the media, find and organize information for research, and develop
coherent, credible arguments about news coverage and the contemporary media landscape.

END

Journalism Principles And Practices

JRN 02205:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111

This course introduces students to the world of journalism: the culture, commerce, ethics, history, working conditions,
rights, responsibilities, standard practices, and effects of evolving technology. Students learn about the nature of a
journalism career and gather information that will serve as a foundation for their future journalism skills as well as for their
lecture and seminar courses.

END

Journalistic Writing

JRN 02210:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course provides an introduction to a wide variety of news writing forms. Students learn how to cover events, conduct
interviews, and write with effective journalistic structure and style.

END

TV Newscast

JRN 02305:

Prerequisites: JRN 02310

Students write, gather, edit, and present a cable newscast on Rowan University's closed-circuit cable system and adapt that
newscast for transmission over the Web. During the semester, students rotate through various duties, including writing,
anchoring, reporting and producing.

END

On-Camera Field Reporting

JRN 02307:

Prerequisites: JRN 02341

On-Camera Field Reporting provides the fundamentals of reporting and includes writing, camera shooting techniques,
editing, gathering sources, and on-camera presentation to perform "one-man band" responsibilities in any television market.
Students will gain extensive hands-on experience that will produce a resume reel for their portfolio. Skills acquired can be
used to edit online video components for news outlets.

END

News Reporting I

JRN 02310:

Prerequisites: JRN 02205

This course teaches students basic reporting and writing skills. They learn newspaper style and use a computer to write
basic stories that deal with accidents, obituaries, construction, statistics, speeches, interviews and polls. Students also learn
how to write humorous stories and how to rewrite news releases. Students take weekly spelling and style quizzes to sharpen
writing skills.

END

News Reporting II-Wi

JRN 02311:

Prerequisites: JRN 02310 and COMP 01112

This course stresses government reporting. Students learn about the Sunshine Law and how to deal with government
sources. They use a computer to write stories about governing bodies, zoning and planning boards, school boards, budgets,
arrests, hearings, arraignments, indictments and trials. Students cover a local community and write various meeting stories.

END

Feature Writing

JRN 02312:

Prerequisites: JRN 02310

This is a journalism class focusing on narrative writing. This class is designed to develop competence in the writing of color
stories, profiles, reviews and opinion pieces.

END

Magazine Article Writing

JRN 02313:

Prerequisites: JRN 02310 or JRN 02210 or PR 06301 or WA 01300 with a grade of C- or better

Students get started as freelance magazine article writers by conceiving article ideas, interviewing, researching, and writing.
The course provides instruction in adjusting style and slant to reach potential readers. Students learn to sharpen writing,
resolve clarity problems, and add vigor to writing. The course analyzes freelance markets. Students submit work for
publication.

END

Photojournalism

JRN 02314:

Prerequisites: 45 credits required

This course covers the practices and techniques used by photojournalists on modern American newspapers. Students take
digital photographs and edit in Photoshop. Weekly laboratory assignments are required.

END

Investigative Journalism

JRN 02318:

Prerequisites: JRN 02310

This course acquaints students with federal and state public records laws. They learn where to find and how to use public
records at federal, state, county, and local levels. Students investigate property records, records on public officials and
business and nonprofit records. They use this and other information to write long-form journalism articles.

END

Media Ethics

JRN 02319:

Prerequisites: JRN 02205 or RTF 03295 or PR 06301

Media Ethics examines decision-making in media professions. The course examines the moral aspects of media conduct,
and helps the student develop a more complete understanding of not only the historical background of ethics, but how the
interplay of politics, science, economics, law, philosophy, and other disciplines have influenced the way we view right and
wrong. The course also strengthens analytical skills as they relate to ethical decisions, cultivating a perception of how media
professionals come to a decision and the many factors that influence that decision.

END

Radio News

JRN 02320:

Prerequisites: completion of 45 earned hours

This course provides training in the necessary skills students must demonstrate to obtain entry-level employment as news
reporters and editors in radio. Students learn broadcast writing and reporting techniques. The course is designed primarily
for those interested in newscasting as a career.

END

Digital Journalism I

JRN 02321:

Prerequisites: JRN 02205 or RTF 03295 or PR 06301

This course provides an introduction to the digital news landscape. Students perform original reporting and a series of
writing, photo, audio, video and social media news assignments.

END

The Publishing Industry

JRN 02322:

Prerequisites: completion of 45 semester hours

The Publishing Industry examines the business and practice of publishing through broad readings and research related to
industry operations and trends, field trips, guest speakers, interactive projects, and directed discussion. Students explore
publishing aspects of books, magazines, newspapers, online material, blogging, podcasting, self-publishing, and editing.
When students complete this course, they will have a better idea of the career path they would like to pursue.

END

Crime Reporting

JRN 02323:

Prerequisites: JRN 02310 with a grade C- or better

The class explores one of the most durable and important aspects of journalism, focusing not only on the mechanics of
crime, but also on how the story reflects the undercurrents of conflict in society as a whole. Crime Reporting focuses on how
to gather information and turn it into a narrative that both tells the story and explores the issues behind the story. Emphasis
will be on researching existing databases and analyzing actual documents. Students will be required to enroll in PACER, a
federal court tracking system.

END

JRN 02324:

Health Reporting

Prerequisites: JRN 02310 with a grade of C- or better or by permission

From news bulletin on peanut butter recalls to a feature story on concussions in football, from advice on preventing
sunburn to in-depth examinations of how the aging of America impacts the economy, health reporting keeps the public
informed about issues affecting their well-being. In this journalism class, students will learn through real-world practice,
guest speakers, and field trips how to report and write about health issues. Topics include public health, healthcare reform,
and health trends.

END

Digital Journalism II

JRN 02325:

Prerequisites: JRN 02321

In this course, students develop a "digital-first" workflow for reporting and news content creation, improve their
multimedia and mobile news skills, and produce digital news packages as individuals and as part of a team.

END

Sports Broadcasting I

JRN 02326:

Prerequisites: JRN 02361 with a grade of C- or better or JRN 02310 with a grade of C- or better or JRN 02210 with a grade of C- or
better or by permission

Sports Broadcast will include play-by-play, color commentary, pre-game and post-game analysis. Students will learn
reporting techniques unique to the world of sports coverage, including interviewing sports figures. They will gain onsite
expereince at Rowan's radio station as well as with Rowan's television network as they become proficient in sports talk and
sports reporting for broadcast.

END

Sports Broadcasting II

JRN 02327:

Prerequisites: JRN 02326 or RTF 03395

This course offers students advanced concepts and techniques for the production and broadcast of sports media. Students
will develop proficiency with play-by-play announcing, radio/tv reporting, and sports talk shows.

END

The Publishing Industry

JRN 02332:

Prerequisites: 75 credits required

The Publishing Industry examines the business and practice of publishing through broad readings and research related to
industry operations and trends, field trips, guest speakers, interactive projects, and directed discussion. Students explore
publishing aspects of books, magazines, newspapers, online material, blogging, podcasting, self-publishing, and editing.
When students complete this course, they will have a better idea of the career path they would like to pursue.

END

Media Law

JRN 02335:

Prerequisites: 45 credits required

This course examines laws that deal with the legal responsibilities of print, broadcast, online and film media as well as
public relations and advertising practitioners. Students analyze topics such as libel, privacy, broadcast regulations, and
copyright.

END

Broadcast News Writing

JRN 02341:

Prerequisites: completion of 45 earned hours

Broadcast News Writing provides instruction in the fundamentals of television news writing essential to all careers in
television news. Students will explore the fast-paced world of writing breaking news for television. They will learn how to
write in TV broadcast style and write news blogs to build their student portfolios.

END

Journalism Practicum Fall

JRN 02355:

Prerequisites: 75 credits required

Journalism Practicum allows students to apply their skills and knowledge by working on-campus with department faculty
on a variety of technical, creative, or research-related assignments. Students earn 1 credit for every 40 hours of work, with
most practica implemented for 3 credit hours. Students keep a detailed log of working hours, prepare an extensive portfolio,
write an analytical critique of the practicum and are evaluated by their faculty supervisor. Journalism Practicum Fall is
offered in the fall. Practica may be taken in any order.

END

Journalism Internship Fall

JRN 02356:

Prerequisites: 75 credits required and Journalism major with 2.5 Major GPA

Under professional supervision in the field, students practice theories and skills learned in the classroom. Students earn 1
credit for every 40 hours of work, with most field experiences implemented for 3 credit hours. Students keep a detailed log
of working hours, prepare an extensive portfolio, write an analytical critique of the practicum, and are evaluated by their
faculty supervisor. Journalism Internship Fall is offered in the Fall. Internships may be taken in any order.

END

Journalism Practicum Spring

JRN 02357:

Prerequisites: 75 credits required

Journalism Practicum allows students to apply their skills and knowledge by working on-campus with department faculty
on a variety of technical, creative, or research-related assignments. Students earn 1 credit for every 40 hours of work, with
most practica implemented for 3 credit hours. Students keep a detailed log of working hours, prepare an extensive portfolio,
write an analytical critique of the practicum and are evaluated by their faculty supervisor. Journalism Practicum Spring is
offered in the spring. Practica may be taken in any order.

END

Journalism Internship Spring

JRN 02358:

Prerequisites: 75 credits required and Journalism major with 2.5 Major GPA

Under professional supervision in the field, students practice theories and skills learned in the classroom. Students earn 1
credit for every 40 hours of work, with most field experiences implemented for 3 credit hours. Students keep a detailed log
of working hours, prepare an extensive portfolio, write an analytical critique of the internship, and are evaluated by their
faculty supervisor. Journalism Internship Spring is offered in spring. Internships may be taken in any order.

END

Journalism Internship Summer

JRN 02359:

Prerequisites: 75 credits required and Journalism major with 2.5 Major GPA

Under professional supervision in the field, students practice theories and skills learned in the classroom. Students earn 1
credit for every 40 hours of work, with most field experiences implemented for 3 credit hours. Students keep a detailed log
of working hours, prepare an extensive portfolio, write an analytical critique of the practicum, and are evaluated by their
faculty supervisor. Journalism Internship Summer is offered in the summer. Internships may be taken in any order.

END

Sports Journalism I

JRN 02361:

Prerequisites: 45 earned hours

This introduction to Sports Journalism focuses on practical experience as well as study of professional sports journalists.
Students cover Rowan University sports teams and learn to produce professional-quality game stories, feature stories,
columns, and a comprehensive enterprise package. In addition, students are required to file weekly reports detailing their
Internet tracking of professional journalists, with a focus on the amount, variety, and quality of their work.

END

Sports Journalism II

JRN 02362:

Prerequisites: JRN 02361

Students will build on sports writing skills learned in Sports Journalism I. Students will work in teams to form sports staffs
that will produce sports sections on a biweekly basis. These sections will include game stories, features and columns, as well
as "surprise" stories. The sports staffs will compete with each other to produce the most compelling, timely, informative,
opinionated and entertaining sections. Each student will spend time in a different role - beat writer, feature writer,
columnist, general-assignment writer, and assigning editor.

END

Data Journalism

JRN 02363:

Prerequisites: JRN 02310

This course covers the basic concepts and techniques of data journalism to inform and engage the public. Students will
find, evaluate, organize and analyze data and learn how to transform it into compelling news stories and graphic
visualizations.

END

Journalism Through Film

JRN 02364:

Prerequisites: 45 credits required

Through film screenings, discussions, and presentations, students explore issues in journalism, such as libel, obscenity,
invasion of privacy, protection of journalistic sources, the right of the individual versus the collective protection of society,
and the balance between the watchdog and the attack-dog nature of the press.

END

Introduction to Entrepreneurial Media

JRN 02365:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111

Introduction to Entrepreneurial Media examines ways media professionals can profit from the technological and economic
upheaval in the mass media environment - the ability of individuals and small groups to produce high-quality media on a
shoestring budget -- by inventing new business models for themselves and new enterprises that focus on media and
journalism.

END

Social Media Management and Metrics

JRN 02366:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111

Media Metrics and Analytics provides a thorough grounding in how media consumption is measured (metrics) and utilized
(analytics) by media organizations and independent professionals. The course spans traditional circulation of print
publications, broadcast, cable, and radio ratings, web site traffic measures, social media statistics and advertising data. Media
Metrics and Analytics examines the types of measures that, for example, are now commonly displayed on monitors in
newsrooms as a way to gauge success of a story, or are used by entrepreneurs to evaluate the overall success of various media.
No special statistical background is necessary, and the course is geared toward using programs and tools that are designed
for use by non-technical personnel.

END

Journalism Senior Seminar-Wi

JRN 02410:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGL 01112 or ENGR 01201 with a grade of C- or better and 90 credit hours and
JRN 02311 with a grade of C- or better

The course probes four issues: ethics, group ownership of the media, the public and the press, and journalism education.
Students read and react to articles in professional journals and other publications. They present panel discussions and
interview media professionals.

END

Copy Editing

JRN 02411:

Prerequisites: JRN 02205 or RTF 03295 or PR 06301

Students learn modern copy-editing skills. They use computers to edit copy and write captions and headlines. Students
interview copy editors to learn more about the job. They take weekly style quizzes to sharpen their editing skills.

END

Newspaper Laboratory

JRN 02420:

Prerequisites: JRN 02310

This laboratory course teaches students to use desktop publishing equipment and modern design principles to produce a
newspaper. It emphasizes interview and research techniques. Students use concepts learned in liberal arts courses to go
beyond the mere facts of a story to add depth that will help readers understand issues. Students function as editors, making
assignments and directing production.

END

Introduction to Sports Communication and Media

SPRT 09101:

This introductory course to the Sports Communication and Media (Sports CaM) program provides students with an
overview of the structure of the Sports CaM major/minor, program expectations, overall learning outcomes, career fields in
sports communication and media, faculty teaching in the program, and concentrations within the program. In addition, this
course will combine academic instruction with industry exposure by providing students with opportunities to network with
professionals from the sports industry.

END

Introduction to Esports

SPRT 09201:

Introduction to Esports is foundational course for students interested in learning the language, history, and culture of the
esports industry and entertainment experience. It is the prerequisite for students completing the CUGS in Esports. The
class cover the historical development of several of the most popular esports games as well as the cultural and economic
implications of those games on the videogame industry.

END

Esports Coverage & Media - Reporting

SPRT 09211:

Prerequisites: SPRT 09201

Esports reporting is a vibrant and growing area of sports journalism. In this course, students will learn the competencies
required to be multimedia reporters who can cover the events, debates and controversies surrounding players, matches,
tournaments, games, leagues and corporations behind this multi billion-dollar entertainment industry. Unlike traditional
sports journalism though, Esports reporting requires videogame-specific skillsets for newsgathering, sourcing unique to the
digital and virtual contours and platforms of video game competition. This course introduces students to Esports research,
interviewing, writing and reporting through practical assignments and coverage of actual Esports events. Through this
course they will develop the foundational skills necessary to begin professional Esports reporting.

END

Esports Coverage & Media - In-Game Observing

SPRT 09212:

Prerequisites: SPRT 09201

This course examines current practices and techniques employed in the visual presentation of Esports by in-game
observers, who must follow the action and show the story of each match quickly, methodically, and accurately, in real-time,
capturing the excitement of the competition for virtual and real life audiences. Students will hone techniques for best
showcasing game storylines and action sequencing, character/player choices, and develop strategies for covering the action
for an audience. Assignments for study and practice provide students the opportunity to apply acquired knowledge in
gameplay situations and begin to build a body of work that showcases experience in Esports in-game observing.

END

Esports Coverage & Media - Shoutcasting

SPRT 09213:

Prerequisites: SPRT 09201

Shoutcasting is the play-by-play and color commentary of Esports competition. This course examines current techniques
and standards of those oral presentations by professionals and experts in the field. Students will learn and practice the basics
of covering a variety of live Esports tournaments and matches across the platforms and technologies used by professional
shoutcasters. Key areas of study and practice explore the fundamentals of match research, game knowledge, verbal
storytelling, and live performance necessary to attract and retain audiences both in person and across streaming platforms.
Assignments and exercises will put these vital skills into practice, in real Esports match situations, with critical feedback to
hone performance abilities. Students will ideally leave the class with an array of foundational skills sought by employers in
the Esports industry and related fields.

END

Internship in Sports Communication and Media I

SPRT 09301:

Prerequisites: CMS 04223 AND 60 Earned Hours AND Cumulative GPA of 2.5

Under professional supervision in the field of sports communication and media, students practice theories and skills
learned in the classroom. Students earn 3 credit hours for 120 hours of field experience completed during a semester.
Students keep a detailed log of working hours, prepare an extensive portfolio, write an analytical critique of the practicum,
and are evaluated by their field supervisor and a faculty coordinator.

END

Internship in Sports Communication Media II

SPRT 09302:

Prerequisites: CMS 04223 AND 60 Earned Hours AND Cumulative GPA of 2.5

Under professional supervision in the field of sports communication and media, students practice theories and skills
learned in the classroom. Students earn 3 credit hours for 120 hours of field experience completed during a semester.
Students keep a detailed log of working hours, prepare an extensive portfolio, write an analytical critique of the practicum,
and are evaluated by their field supervisor and a faculty coordinator.

END

SPRT 09303:

Internship in Sports Communication and Media III

Prerequisites: CMS 04223 AND 60 Earned Hours AND Cumulative GPA of 2.5

Under professional supervision in the field of sports communication and media, students practice theories and skills
learned in the classroom. Students earn 3 credit hours for 120 hours of field experience completed during a semester.
Students keep a detailed log of working hours, prepare an extensive portfolio, write an analytical critique of the practicum,
and are evaluated by their field supervisor and a faculty coordinator.

END

Special Topics in Sports Communication and Media

SPRT 09304:

Special Topics in Sports Communication and Media (SportsCaM) enables students to explore a range of issues and themes
related to the sports media industry. The precise topic will vary based on curriculum developments, faculty expertise, and
student interest.

END

Representations & Identity in Esports

SPRT 09315:

Prerequisites: SPRT 09201

Representations & Identity in Esports is a critical examination of issues of diversity, equity, and inclusion specific to
competitive video gaming. Students employ media studies and cultural theory to unpack Esports’ complex nexus of
stakeholders and global communities and the emerging issues of transmediated play and non-human representation. Class
assignments require students’ critical engagement with past and current crises in the space through writing and discussion
designed to train them in the skills needed to address the vital challenges facing contemporary Esports.

END

Esports Reporting

SPRT 09316:

Prerequisites: SPRT 09201

Esports reporting is a vibrant and growing area of sports journalism. In this course, students will learn the foundational
competencies required to be multimedia reporters who can cover the events, debates, and controversies surrounding the
players, tournaments, titles, leagues, platforms, and corporations behind this multibillion-dollar industry. This course
introduces students to esports research, interviewing, writing, and reporting through practical assignments and coverage of
actual esports events. By the end of the course students will have developed the foundational skills necessary to become
entry-level esports journalists.

END

Esports Streaming & Social Platforms

SPRT 09317:

Esports Streaming & Social Platforms provides an overview of the social media and streaming platforms fundamental to
esports’ existence and how to use them to successfully communicate in the rapidly growing industry of competitive video
games. Students train on those platforms to develop the skills and knowledge they will need to begin careers across the
esports media ecosystem. By the end of the course, students will be fluent in the language and tools of esports-specific social
and streaming platforms and the strategies to develop effective messaging for the panoply of stakeholders on them.

END

Esports Coverage: Shoutcasting & In-Game Observing

SPRT 09318:

Corequisites: SPRT 09201

This course examines current practices and evolving standards in the production and coverage of esports broadcasts across
a variety of platforms. Key areas of study include shoutcasting and in-game observing, the play-by-play commentary and
video direction of esports. Through Esports Coverage, students will develop the foundational skills necessary to begin
producing professional esports broadcasts.

END

EVOLUTION OF ESPORTS

SPRT 09319:

Prerequisites: SPRT 09201

Evolution of Esports is an upper level course designed for students interested in developing a critical understanding the
history of esports and videogames while also analyzing the evolving trends guiding the growth of esports as a cultural
phenomenon. Evolution of Esports digs into the origins of competitive video gaming to unpack how the niche pastime has
grown into a multibillion-dollar industry, and uses that background to explore what might come next with practical projects
geared toward careers in the esports industry.

END

Senior Seminar in Sports Communication and Media-WI

SPRT 09401:

This writing intensive course challenges students to integrate what they have learned in their classes in the Sports
Communication and Media major as they probe relevant issues in sports and society through discussion, presentations and
writing assignments. Students will also produce a capstone project in their particular area of interest: Communication
Studies, Public Relations and Advertising, Journalism, or Radio, Television and Film.

END

Current Policy and Practice in ESL and Bilingual Education

BLED 40405:

This course addresses foundational theories and areas of research related to the field of TESOL and bilingual education.
Special emphasis is placed on the forces affecting students and policies related to second language schooling in state,
national, and international contexts. Students will develop a reflective philosophy for educating English Language learners.

END

BLED 40410:

ESL FIELD EXPER

END

Linguistics and Second Language Acquisition for Teaching Languages

BLED 40412:

This course addresses basic concepts of linguistic theory and second language acquisition research. Content will focus on
components of the language system in the context of second language teaching. Students will compare and contrast second
language acquisition paradigms and investigate their application to the classroom.

END

Understanding Immigrant, Bilingual, and English Learner Students

BLED 40415:

In this course, students examine the experiences and identities of immigrant, bilingual, and English Learner (EL) students,
focusing on the intersections among language, culture,socioeconomic status, race, religion, national origin, disability and
gender. Special issues related to immigration and institutional discrimination faced by EL students are also
addressed.Candidates will gain the knowledge, skills, and dispositions to become culturally and linguistically responsive
advocates for EL students and to create partnerships with families and communities.

END

Planning, Teaching, and Assessing in ESL Classrooms

BLED 40420:

Prerequisites: BLED 40412 AND BLED 40415

This course concentrates on how teachers plan, teach, and assess in ESL classes. Students will create unit plans that
incorporate both language and content area objectives and learn a variety of research-based instructional methods to
support language acquisition and student learning.

END

Teaching Bilingual/Bicultural Education: Process and Practice

BLED 40421:

The course examines current programs and pedagogical practices in bilingual education appropriate to a range of content
areas and grade levels. Dual language pedagogy, microteaching, and advocacy activities are practiced to provide a basis for
reflective teaching. State-approved examinations in oral and written English and the target language are required for
certification.

END

Integrating Language, Literacy, and Content in ESL and Bilingual Classrooms

BLED 40422:

Prerequisites: BLED 40420 or BLED 40421

This course examines the theory and practice of integrating language and content in K-12 ESL, bilingual and content-area
classrooms. Specific focus is given to methods pertaining to implementing sheltered instruction models, content-based ESL,
students' proficiency levels, proficiency testing, and strategies for collaborating with other teachers and school leaders.

END

Biliteracies & Translanguaging in the Bilingual Education Classroom

BLED 40424:

Prerequisites: BLED 40421

This course builds on introductory content in BLED 40.421 to address language use and literacy development in bilingual
classrooms. Theoretical perspectives on literacy development will be reviewed with a focus on sociocultural, critical, and
translanguaging perspectives. Planning for strategic use of both languages, and reading and writing instruction that
strengthens the connections between languages, will be the primary foci of course work.

END

Issues Of Language And Cultural Diversity In ESL/Bilingual Programs

BLED 40510:

This course focuses on foundational theories and areas of research related to the field of TESOL and bilingual education.
Special emphasis is placed on the forces affecting students and policies related to second language schooling in state,
national and international contexts. Students will develop a reflective philosophy for educating English Language learners.

END

Linguistics And Second Language Acquisition For Teaching Languages

BLED 40512:

This course addresses basic concepts of linguistic theory and second language acquisition research. Students will compare
and contrast second language acquisition pradigms and investigate their applicability to the classroom. Discussion will also
focus on components of the language system in the context of second language teaching.

END

Understanding Immigrant-Origin Students: Language, Culture, and Mobility

BLED 40515:

In this course, students examine the experiences and identities of immigrant-origin and emergent bilingual students,
focusing on language, culture, immigration, and transnationalism. Special issues related to socioeconomic status, race,
religion, disability, gender, and forms of discrimination that immigrant-origin students encounter are addressed. Students
also examine advocacy issues and ways to support partnerships with families and communities.

END

Teaching Bilingual/Bicultural Education: Process And Practice

BLED 40521:

The course examines current programs and available materials in bilingual education appropriate to a range of content
areas and grade levels. Microteaching and peer coaching are practiced to provide a basis for reflective teaching. The course is
open to candidates who possess or are eligible for a standard or provisional New Jersey instructional certificate.
State-approved examinations in oral and written English and the target language are required for certification.

END

BLED 40522:

Integrating Language And Content In The ESL/Bilingual Education Classroom

This course examines the theory and practice of integrating language and content in K-12 ESL, bilingual and content-area
classrooms. Specific focus is given to methods pertaining to implementing sheltered instruction modles, content-based ESL,
students' proficiency levels, proficiency testing, and strategies for collaborating with other teachers and school leaders.

END

Critical Consciousness: Sharing Power and Voice with Students

CASE 90531:

Students will learn to use dialogic instructional strategies to create student-teacher partnerships that respect student voice
and affirm the lived experiences of students. Participants will learn strategies to engage students and themselves in critical
inquiry about identify, privilege, and social justice, and to share power and voice in their classrooms.

END

Working with Families and Communities

CASE 90532:

This course will help teachers to develop a robust, critical, and theory-based understanding of the interaction of families
and schools. Students will also learn to work collaboratively within their schools to equitably and purposefully engage with
the families of their students and the communities surrounding their schools. By the end of this course, students will
develop a set of research questions and vignettes for a community-based participatory research project. Students will
identify and closely examine several models of family and community engagement in schools, connecting these models with
current school and classroom practices of engaging with families and communities. Students also will engage in coursework
toward two products: 1) a conceptual framework for interacting with families as education professionals, and 2) analysis and
reconstruction of a school-based family and community event.

END

Critical Pedagogy

CASE 90533:

The theoretical framework for this course builds upon conceptualizations of critical pedagogy that supports educators to
challenge traditional beliefs about the ways that school works. This requires a commitment to the construction of
knowledge by sharing power and authority between students and teachers, challenging the hegemonic or “common sense”
notions of what school is and should be, and sharing control of the curriculum and pedagogy of the classroom.

END

Creating Supportive Middle & High School Learning Environments

EDUC 01270:

Prerequisites: SMED 40450

This course will enable Subject Matter Education (SME) teacher candidates to gain an understanding of the effect of the
learning environment on student achievement. Candidates will learn strategies for creating and maintaining a positive
learning environment in which all learners can achieve their potential. The course will focus on student-centered instruction
that promotes civil discourse and strategies to address no-engagement. Clinical (field) experiences will provide the
opportunity for teacher candidates to begin to make the connection between the content of the course and its application in
secondary SME classrooms.

END

Teaching Content in Diverse Classrooms

EDUC 01272:

Prerequisites: SMED 40450

This course will enable Subject Matter Education (SME) candidates to gain a multifaceted understanding of the individual
and institutional elements that impact student achievement and schooling experiences. Candidates will then learn about
specific approaches and instructional practices that they can use in the classroom to promote learning for culturally and
linguistically diverse students, including teaching academic language, differentiating instruction and assessments, and
supporting home, community, and school partnerships.

END

History Of American Education

FNDS 21150:

This course provides an in-depth study of American education from 1600 to the present, covering preschool through
post-secondary education. It focuses on the social forces, sources of conflict, major educational figures and patterns of
schooling during each period. In addition, the course will highlight the ways in which diversity has been accommodated,
marginalized, or rejected in American education. Students will be able to identify and discuss ways in which diversity has
been accommodated, marginalized, or rejected in American education.

END

Improving Personal Reading Skills

READ 17100:

This basic skills course helps students whose reading skills need improvement in order to cope with the demands of college
course work. Instruction in the full semester course emphasizes vocabulary, comprehension and study skills. This course is
not counted toward graduation. It is a required course for entering students who do not pass the Rowan University Basic
Skills competency requirement in Reading.

END

Critical Thinking and Reading of Academic Texts

READ 30100:

This course is designed to address the needs of any university student who wishes to become a more critical, proficient
college reader. The course is characterized by providing multiple opportunities for students to apply critical thinking and
reading skills to a variety of academic texts. It will provide multiple opportunities to learn and apply a variety of strategies
needed to successfully negotiate academic texts and academic vocabulary across a broad spectrum of majors. Critical
thinking and reading skills, effective communication, decision making and self-management skills will be emphasized.

END

Literacies In Today's World

READ 30120:

This course will provide students with historical and cultural perspective of how and why people acquire and use literacy to
meet personal and societal needs. By viewing literacy through different lenses students will acquire an understanding of the
interrelationship of language, thought, and social practice.

END

Teaching Literacy

READ 30280:

A basic understanding of the reading process and its relationship to the other language arts is the focus of this course.
Topics pertaining to reading/writing instruction in grades K-12, ranging from emergent literacy to comprehension of
narrative and expository discourse are covered. There is an emphasis on strategies for developing phonemic awareness, word
recognition skills, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension through various instructional settings and across all curricular
areas. The importance of literature-enrichment activities and making curricular connections is highlighted. Field
component is required.

END

Teaching Reading In The Content Areas

READ 30310:

This course helps students integrate reading methods and strategies into subject matter instruction. Students learn a basic
format for lesson planning. They acquire an understanding of the reading process and examine a variety of instructional
techniques for assessing pupil abilities, selecting suitable materials, and fostering language, comprehension, and study skills
needed for mastery of academic subjects.

END

Literacy Pedagogy I

READ 30311:

This course explores the broadening nature of literacy and literacy instruction in the 21st century. The course addresses
both the theory and pedagogy of literacy instruction. Topics range from emergent literacy to comprehension of narrative
and expository discourse and address reading and writing instruction that engages students in the K-5 classroom. This
course has a particular focus on designing literacy instruction for culturally and linguistically diverse students that positions
the literacy teacher as a reflective practitioner with a focus on teaching for social justice.

END

Teaching Reading And Writing In The Content Area

READ 30319:

This course helps students integrate reading and writing methods and strategies into subject matter instruction in grades
K-12 ranging from emergent literacy to comprehension of narrative and expository text. There is an emphasis on strategies
for developing phonemic awareness, word recognition skills, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension through various
instructional settings as well as integrating writing to learn strategies. Students acquire understanding for assessing pupil
abilities, selecting suitable materials and fostering language, comprehension, and study skills needed for mastery of academic
subjects. The importance of literature-enrichment acitivities and making curricular connections is highlighted.

END

Language Development, Emergent Literacy, And Reading In Young Children

READ 30320:

Corequisites: ECED 23320 OR INCL 02210

Students will gain an understanding of five phases of Literacy: Awareness and Exploration; Experimental Reading and
Writing; Early Reading and Writing; Transitional Reading and Writing; Independent Reading and Writing. Students will
learn how to integrate literacy across all curricula in the forms of reading, writing speaking, listening, and viewing. They will
be able to identify, assess, adapt and implement a variety of strategies that take into account children with special needs.
Further, students will be able to recognize the impact of cultural, linguistic, and other diversities that affect engagement in
literacy learning and they will be able to identify and utilize effective teaching strategies that address these differences. This
course also requires a weekly field experience in a pre-school setting.

END

Phonics And Spelling Instruction

READ 30347:

Prerequisites: READ 30280 or REED 30280 or READ 30311 or READ 30320

This course prepares prospective teachers to blend evidence-based phonemic awareness, phonics, word identification, and
spelling instruction strategically into an integrated language arts approach to teaching literacy. Major topics include the
development of children's phonic/spelling knowledge; what teachers should know about language; informal techniques to
assess children's early literacy, word identification, and spelling understandings; systematic and meaningfully applied
instruction to meet development, cultural, and linguistic differences; and communicating with parents and professionals

END

Using Children's Literature In The Reading/Writing Classroom

READ 30350:

Prerequisites: REED 30280, READ 30280, READ 30311 or READ 30320

This course prepares prospective teachers to integrate reading and writing in a language arts program through the use of
book selections that reflect quality writing in the genres typically found in children's literature. The course will provide
students with sufficient background and knowledge in children's literature so that they may teach reading by using trade
books, emphasizing process writing and developing thematic units. Language, literacy, and learning will be enhanced by
integrating children's literature across the curriculum.

END

Literacy Pedagogy II

READ 30351:

Prerequisites: READ 30280

This course prepares teacher candidates to provide differentiated literacy instruction in diverse classrooms with a wide
range of developmental levels, instructional needs, interests, and backgrounds. Teacher candidates will learn how to select,
administer, and analyze various assessment tools to inform instruction. Field experience is required.

END

School Reading Problems-Writing Intensive

READ 30421:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and READ 30347

In this course, students learn to teach struggling readers by applying their knowledge of literacy instruction learned in
pre-req coursework. They use assessments and observations to identify students' reading levels. Students are required
to use on-going diagnostic teaching techniques to plan, teach, and adjust instruction according to the needs and interests of
struggling learners. Process writing is used throughout. As a course requirement, students work in the Rowan Reading
Clinic. Students tutor a K-12 student for 20 hours and write a final report.

END

Supervised Clinical Practice In Reading

READ 30451:

Prerequisites: READ 30421 or READ 30350

Students in this course apply diagnostic, reflective teaching procedures in order to teach struggling readers in a clinical
setting. They select materials and instructional strategies that meet the specific needs of the child. Emphasis is placed on
on-going, diagnostic teaching that integrates the language arts in instruction that adjusts to the needs and interests of
struggling readers. Students will conduct informal reading assessments at the end of the clinic session in order to write a
formal report that includes assessment data; students' strengths and needs; and recommendations to parents, classroom
teachers, and future tutors for further instruction.

END

Advanced English Language Arts Methods for the Inclusive Classroom-WI

READ 30452:

Prerequisites: INCL 02115, READ 30311, READ 30351, and SPED 08307

This is a specialized literacy and writing methods course that addresses topics focused on including pedagogy and strategies
for developing and implementing reading and writing interventions to support students with a range of needs and
characteristics in inclusive environments. This is a writing intensive course where students will apply knowledge of inclusive
practices, research-based reading instruction, and assessment and evaluation to develop an intervention plan. A field
placement is required for this course.

END

Workshop In Reading

READ 30495:

This course examines current developments related to reading instruction. It is suitable for students who have experience
working in a school. Emphasis is given to effective practices related to teaching reading. Specific topics are selected by the
instructor and students. Examples include: reading in vocational programs, interrelating language arts instruction, evaluating
software, managing reading instruction, etc. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Teaching Reading And Writing Across The Grades

READ 30515:

Students acquire a background in current theory and practices related to emerging literacy, word identification, fluency,
comprehension, study skills, and recreational reading in grades K-12. The relationships between reading and the other
language arts and between reading and other subject areas are addressed. Additionally, students become familiar with
various methods, materials and technology used in teaching reading, assessing reading performance, and organizing and
managing a reading program in the K-12 classroom. This course is required for those seeking the M.A. in reading education
and/or reading specialist certification. Teachers and administrators who wish to increase their knowledge in the K-12
reading curriculum and instruction may also enroll.

END

Content Area Literacy

READ 30520:

This course is designed for reading and non-reading majors interested in increasing knowledge and skills in teaching
reading in the content areas. It is a required course for those seeking an M.A. in reading. Instruction is provided in the
developmental aspects of reading with little emphasis on corrective or remedial practices. The content of the course may be
oriented toward the subject matter areas represented by the students enrolled in the course. Special emphasis is also given to
developing vocabulary, comprehension, and study skills as well as to assessing pupil ability to read content material and to
select suitable materials for instruction.

END

Teaching Reading to Students with Disabilities

READ 30530:

The primary purpose of the course is to present the philosophy of teaching reading to exceptional children along with the
appropriate methods and materials. Major topics include the nature and needs of children who deviate from normal
assessment of reading ability, emerging literacy, the role of parents and the child study team, intervention strategies, settings
for instruction, word recognition, comprehension and study skill techniques appropriate for exceptional learners,
adaptations of methods and materials, and organizational patterns. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Word Study: Phonics, Spelling, And Vocabulary Instruction

READ 30535:

This course develops understandings for teaching phonics, spelling, and vocabulary in integrated language arts classrooms.
The importance of knowing what to teach and when is emphasized. Major topics include: the development of word
knowledge from emergent literacy to adulthood, strategies for instruction, the role of assessment, and parental involvement.

END

Using Multicultural Literature In The K-12 Reading And Writing Classroom

READ 30545:

This course will focus on reading and actively engaging with a wide variety of multicultural texts for children and
adolescents. Multicultural literature will be broadly defined to include an examination of difference that looks closely at
those traditionally absent or marginalized in texts for young readers. Course readings will emphasize issues of selection
versus censorship and the ability of multicultural literature to provide enjoyment while allowing for the development of
cultural awareness/sensitivity.

END

Diagnosis Of Remedial Reading Problems

READ 30550:

Prerequisites: READ 30540 and READ 30535 andREAD 30530; Corequisites: READ 30560

Students in this course will become aware of the factors which influence reading achievement. They will learn to
administer standardized and informal tests to individuals as well as to small groups. Furthermore, they will recognize the
need to modify some procedures for exceptional learners. Throughout the course, the importance of on-going assessment
will be emphasized. Finally, strategies for interpreting and reporting test results will be delineated. As a course requirement,
students will administer selected tests to a student and summarize the results in a report.

END

Corrections Of Remedial Reading Problems

READ 30560:

Corequisites: READ 30550 with minimum grade of B

Students in this course become aware of factors that are considered when planning instruction for readers experiencing
difficulty. In planning lessons students design and adapt instructional materials, develop computer-based teaching
strategies, and implement instructional procedures in an integrated language arts perspective. The course instructor
supervises students as they use diagnostic teaching strategies to instruct remedial readers in field-based settings.

END

Clinical Experiences In Reading

READ 30570:

Prerequisites: READ 30560

Students plan and execute reading lessons for groups of remedial readers. They integrate the results of testing, observation
and the assessment of reading-related factors in order to devise appropriate sequences of corrective instruction. Students
select and use varied teaching strategies, including remedial techniques in order to adjust to the individual needs of their
pupils. Following weekly observations, students discuss their performance with the instructor. During the seminar portion
of the class, students learn to administer, interpret and evaluate diagnostic instruments. They are taught to use corrective
procedures which integrate the language arts and utilize computers.

END

Reading Research Seminar II

READ 30600:

Prerequisites: READ 30570 and READ 30599

The most commonly used techniques employed in educational research are studied. Guided reading and discussion of
research articles in reading education are provided. Research studies are analyzed and critiqued with special attention given
to the methodology of the studies. Enrollment is limited to matriculated graduate students with permission of the graduate
advisor.

END

Teaching Students Of Linguistic And Cultural Diversity

SECD 03350:

Corequisites: ECED 23446 and ECED 23447 or ELEM 02445 and ELEM 02448 or SECD 03435 and SECD 03436

The issues of inclusion form an integral part of a teacher preparation program. The schooling of all children demands that
diversity in multiple forms be addressed in the inclusive classroom, including cultural and linguistic diversity. Knowledge
about diversities and the performance of appropriate instructional strategies are emphasized in this course, and attention is
directed to the sensitivity needed to assist the learning of students of linguistic and cultural diversity.

END

Schools & Society: Foundations for Secondary Teaching

SMED 40450:

This introductory course addresses a number of foundational questions in the field of education, including: Who goes to
school and for what purposes? What is taught and who decides? How are schools organized and who funds them? How are
schools different now than they were 100 years ago? What legal precedents and reform movements have shaped education
today? How are schools in the United States similar to and different from those abroad?

END

Clinical Practice I

SMED 40462:

Corequisites: READ 30319 OR SELN 40477 OR SMED 51330 OR SMED 52330 OR SMED 50330

This course serves as the first semester of the yearlong residency required for BA Subject Matter Education teacher
candidates. Each resident is placed in a middle or high school classroom during the Fall semester for an extended time,
allowing for opportunities to apply pedagogy and principles from the co-req subject specific Teaching and Learning A
course. This course is graded as Pass/No Credit, with a “Pass” indicating a grade of C- or better.

END

Clinical Practice II

SMED 40463:

Prerequisites: SMED 40462 AND Corequisites: SMED 52331 OR SMED 51331 OR SMED 50331

This is the second of the two field experiences required for candidates in the BA SME program. Continuing in their field
placement from Clinical Practice I, candidates will attend their field placements 5 full days per week during the Spring
semester, while taking the co-req subject Teaching and Learning B course. This course is graded as Pass/No Credit,
with a “Pass” indicating a grade of C- or better.

END

SME Professional Seminar

SMED 40464:

Prerequisites: SMED 40462; Corequisites: SMED 50331 or or SMED 51331 or SMED 52331

This is a capstone course in the B.A. in Subject Matter Education program and will prepare candidates for their teaching
positions by focusing on issues critical to new teachers. The course is designed to support candidates in their final transition
from teacher candidate to teacher. Topics include understanding school climate, developing a professional development
plan, and developing a plan for communicating with families.

END

Teaching/Learning A: English Language Arts

SMED 50330:

Prerequisites: C- or better in EDUC 01272

This first of two content-specific pedagogy courses, this one with a middle school emphasis, is designed for teacher
candidates majoring in English and planning careers as K-12 English language arts teachers. In conjunction with a
co-req practicum, the course includes building a functioning learning community, including English language arts
pedagogy, national and New Jersey standards for English language arts, lesson and unit planning, classroom management,
and attention to learning among the diverse populations who attend New Jersey schools.

END

Teaching/Learning B: English Language Arts

SMED 50331:

Prerequisites: SMED 50330; Corequisites: SECD 03332

This second of two content-specific pedagogy courses, this one with high school emphasis, is designed for teacher
candidates majoring in English and planning careers as K-12 English language arts teachers. In conjunction with a
co-req practicum, the course includes both campus and public school-based experiences dealing with a range of topics
necessary to building a functioning learning community, including English language arts pedagogy, national and New Jersey
standards for English language arts, lesson and unit planning, classroom management, and attention to learning among the
diverse populations who attend New Jersey schools.

END

Teaching/Learning A: World Languages

SMED 51330:

Prerequisites: C- or better in EDUC 01272

This course is the first of two sequential junior level courses designed for the teacher candidate preparing to teach foreign
languages K-12. The focus of this course is the instruction of students in grades K-8. The course treats a variety of topics
essential to development of the knowledge, skills, and dispositions of the professional foreign language teacher, including
second language acquisition, using the state and local standards to plan units and lessons, and contemporary instructional
strategies. The course includes a public school field experience in an elementary or middle school.

END

Teaching/Learning B: Foreign Language

SMED 51331:

Prerequisites: SMED 51330 Minimum Grade of C

This course is the second of two sequential junior level courses designed for the teacher candidate preparing to teach
foreign languages K-12. The focus of this course is the instruction of students from 9-12 grades. The course treats a variety of
topics essential to development of the knowledge, skills, and dispositions of the professional foreign language teacher,
including content planning and organization and contemporary instructional strategies. The course includes a public school
field experiences in a middle or high school.

END

Teaching/Learning A: Social Studies

SMED 52330:

Prerequisites: C- or better in EDUC 01272

This first in a sequence of two three-credit courses is designed for students majoring in one of the social studies disciplines
and planning careers as K-12 social studies teachers. Teacher candidates will learn to organize instructional materials into
standards-based social studies units and daily lessons appropriate for the elementary and middle school grades. In
conjunction with a co-req practicum, this course includes both community- and public school-based experiences
dealing with a range of topics necessary to building a functioning learning community in social studies classrooms, including
an introduction to theories of social studies education, standards-based lesson and unit planning, social studies pedagogy,
classroom management, and learner diversity.

END

Teaching/Learning B: Social Studies

SMED 52331:

Prerequisites: SMED 52330 Minimum Grade of C; Corequisites: SECD 03332

This second in a sequence of two three-credit courses is designed for teacher candidates majoring in one of the social
studies disciplines and planning careers as K-12 social studies teachers. Building upon understandings of elementary and
middle-grade content and instructional planning as developed in Teaching and Learning A, teacher candidates will learn to
create standards-based social studies units and daily lessons for the middle and/or high school grades. In conjunction with a
co-req practicum, this course includes both community- and public school-based experiences dealing with a range of
topics necessary to building a functioning learning community in social studies classrooms, including standards-based lesson
and unit planning, social studies pedagogy, classroom management, learner diversity, and ongoing professional development.

END

Schools & Society: Foundations for Secondary Teaching

SMED 60550:

This introductory course addresses a number of foundational questions in the field of education, including: Who goes to
school and for what purposes? What is taught and who decides? How are schools organized and who funds them? How are
schools different now than they were 100 years ago? What legal precedents and reform movements have shaped education
today? How are schools in the United States similar to and different from those abroad?

END

Clinical Practice I

SMED 60562:

Prerequisites: SMED 60553; Corequisites: SMED 60560 OR READ 30520 OR SELN 60577

This course is the first of two state-mandated field experiences required for candidates in the MST Program. Candidates
will attend their field placements 3 full days per week during the semester, while taking the co-req subjects Curriculum,
Instruction, and Assessment I (SMED 60560), Content Area Literacy (READ 30520), and Effective Inclusive Instruction
(SELN 60577). This course is graded as Pass/No Credit, with a “Pass” indicating a grade of C- or better.

END

Clinical Practice II

SMED 60563:

Prerequisites: SMED 60562; Corequisites: SMED 60561

This is the second of the two state-mandated field experiences required for candidates in the MST program. Continuing in
their field placement from Clinical Practice I, candidates will attend their field placements 5 full days per week during the
semester, while taking the co-req subject Curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment II (SMED 60561).This course is
graded as Pass/No Credit, with a “Pass” indicating a grade of C- or better.

END

MST SME Professional Seminar

SMED 60564:

Prerequisites: SMED 60.562 and Corequisites: SMED 60.561

This is the capstone course in the MST SME and will prepare candidates for their teaching positions by focusing on issues
critical to new teachers. The coures is designed to support candiddates in their final transition from teacher candidate to
treacher. Topics include understanding school climate, developing a professional development plan, developing a plan for
communicating with families, planning for the first six weeks (or unit) of schoiol, and preparing for a substitute teacher.

END

Introduction To Corrections - Wi

LAWJ 05116:

This course studies the historical development of correctional practices in the handling of criminals from early to modern
times. Students survey contemporary correctional organizational structures and treatment processes, as well as institutional
and community based programs and problems.

END

Introduction To Security

LAWJ 05120:

This course presents the organization and management of the security function in industry, business, government and
institutions. It also covers the protection of personnel, facilities and other assets as well as the administrative, legal and
technical problems of loss prevention and control.

END

Survey Of Criminal Justice

LAWJ 05175:

This general education approved social science elective course deals with the nature of crime and criminal responsibility,
and elements of social control. It also surveys the criminal justice process from original law enforcement contact through
the judicial and correctional phases. It includes professional roles and opportunities in the criminal justice field.

END

Introduction To Corrections

LAWJ 05200:

This course studies the historical development of correctional practices in the handling of criminals from early to modern
times. Students survey contemporary correctional organized structures and treatment processes, as well as institutional and
community based programs and problems.

END

Introduction To Courts

LAWJ 05201:

This course covers the organization of both the state and federal court systems; the management and administration of
those courts; the relationship of courts to the police, corrections, and community; the criminal trial process, including
pre-trial and post-trial processes; and the judiciary and judicial power, including the areas of separation of powers and
judicial behavior.

END

American Police

LAWJ 05202:

This course covers the philosophy and history of the police role in society. It surveys organizational forms and basic
procedures of police work; police ethics and professional preparation for law enforcement; and, major police problems
confronting the police today.

END

Minorities, Crime And Criminal Justice

LAWJ 05205:

In this course students critically examine the involvement of minorities with crime in the U.S. both as perpetrators and
victims. Additionally, they will be afforded the opportunity to understand, critically examine, and apply significant
theoretical perspectives for the study of minority criminality. They will develop an understanding of the impact of race and
class within the law-making process, the content of the law, and the quality of justice afforded minorities within the
American criminal justice system.

END

Restorative Justice

LAWJ 05210:

This course surveys the major theoretical and applied concepts of Restorative and Community Justice. Students will
examine how the Restorative and Community Justice processes differ from the traditional, retributive criminal justice
system and how Restorative Justice models attempt to benefit the victim, offender and the community. Some of the issues
to be covered are: informal justice practices, reintegrative shaming, forgiveness and resentment, and the efficacy of
Restorative and Community Justice initiatives. Additionally, students may have opportunities to interact with adjudicated
youth from New Jersey's Restorative Justice Project.

END

Victimology

LAWJ 05220:

This course gives students insight into the "forgotten" party in a crime, the victim. The course covers victims' rights in the
Justice System with specific coverage of the following: the social, economic and racial impacts of crime on victims; victims
and courts; police reaction to victims; restitution; offender accountability and the dramatic increase in victims programs and
services.

END

Media and Crime

LAWJ 05225:

This undergraduate level course aims to provide students with an understanding of the role that media plays in our
understanding of criminal justice problems and solutions as well as the role that popular media plays in the lif ecysle of
criminal justice issues and policies. This course demostrates to students how the portrayal of crime and justice in the media
has real and lasting impacts on the public's perception of crime, fear of crime, and attitudes toward the criminal justice
system and thosse involved at all levels of the criminal justice system, as well as significant effects on criminal justice policy.

END

Introduction to Gangs

LAWJ 05229:

The course introduces students to the historical development of gangs in the United States and current violent gang
subculture. Particular attention is placed on “super-gangs” (i.e., non-local gangs) and outlaw motorcycle clubs. The concept
of hybrid gangs is also introduced and examined. The course examines the theoretical and empirical evidence surrounding
the frequency, prevalence and causes of gang-related crime. The course also examines the effectiveness of formal and
informal gang-suppression policies and programs.

END

The Scholarship Of Criminal Justice

LAWJ 05250:

This course is designed to augment required composition courses with a specific focus on writing within the discipline.
The course is designed to prepare students to be more effective scholars in criminal justice in preparation for criminal
justice research and other advanced law and justice courses.

END

Criminal Law

LAWJ 05255:

This course offers a comprehensive review of the major common law and statutory crimes including homicide, rape and all
related personal and property offenses. The students will be introduced to domestic violence offenses. Considerable
attention is given to the social, moral and constitutional frameworks of the criminal law with a review of recent and standard
judicial interpretations. It also offers a review of defenses and mitigation.

END

Criminal Justice And Community Relations

LAWJ 05274:

This is a broad-based course on the relationship between the community and crime and the criminal. The course covers
such topical areas as police-community relationships, the culture of the inner city, human service delivery systems, the role
of citizen and business groups and the criminal justice system, and the various ways in which criminal justice agencies have
an obligation to the community at large.

END

Parole, Probation And Community Corrections

LAWJ 05276:

A comprehensive review of the noninstitutional response to criminal behavior, this course covers probation, parole and
community corrections in depth. It includes topics like work release, education release, half-way houses, drug and alcohol
centers, legal aspects of these processes and the effectiveness of these programs.

END

Homeland Security

LAWJ 05280:

This course explores the development of homeland security and provides a foundational knowledge of homeland security
definitions, trends and issues. Specifically, this course introduces the student to the legal foundations of homeland security,
vulnerabilities, policy debates, and response and recovery. Students will gain knowledge of the actors, institutions and
processes involved in homeland security decision-making. Finally, the course will introduce the current and future efforts of
homeland security in the United States.

END

Criminal Investigation

LAWJ 05285:

Students study the criminal investigation process. Analysis of problems encountered in interviewing, interrogating and
investigating is included. The course covers investigative techniques that may be applied to investigative problems and
develops application of criminal investigation theories to the administration of justice.

END

Police Use of Force

LAWJ 05287:

This course will provide a framework to understand issues surrounding the lawful implementation of force by police
personnel. Areas to be explored include a historical assessment of police use of force in the United States, state and federal
legal constraints on police use of force, civil rights violations, analyses of statistical findings regarding police use of force, and
a survey of ideas regarding increased professionalism and accountability in the lawful application of both deadly and
non-deadly police force.

END

Casino Crime

LAWJ 05288:

This course explores the various criminal activities and regulatory violations that are unique to and/or facilitated by the
cash rich environment which casinos provide. Not only are the overt crimes associated with gaming examined, but students
will gain insights into aspects of white collar crime, terrorism, risk assessment and others. Further, students will understand
the theoretical and contextual background of how to manage these crimes/violations. Additionally, the ideas of hospitality
security, the oversight of state and local authorities, and how private corporations work with those agencies.

END

Forensic Law

LAWJ 05290:

This class offers a comprehensive analysis of legal issues involving forensic techniques in the justice systems. This course
examines the importance of admissibility, relevance and materiality as it relates to the evidence and the various experts in
Forensics. The topics include bloodstain patter and trace evidence, pathology and gunshot wounds, DNA fingerprinting,
micrography, postmortem determinations and case studies in Forensic Science.

END

Religion, Crime and Punishment

LAWJ 05295:

This course provides an overview of how religion, faith and spirituality predicts and explains individual and community
levels of criminality and deviant behavior and attitudes toward punishment of offenders. The course also delves into how
religion, faith and spirituality affects forgiveness as well as the role of forgiveness, mercy and repentance within the criminal
justice process. Overall, the course allows students to see how religiosity and religion is measured and how these correlate
with criminality, deviant behavior, punitiveness and other measures related to crime, criminality and punishment.

END

Law And Evidence

LAWJ 05305:

This course covers the basic principles of criminal evidence, including burdens of proof, judicial notice, presumptions,
testimonial privileges and hearsay; the rule of exclusion of evidence, confessions, identifications and electronic
eavesdropping; and the use of physical and demonstrative evidence including fingerprints, exhibits, photographs, documents
and writings, scientific evidence and the polygraph.

END

LAWJ 05310:

Students study the history and philosophy of modern criminal law. This course covers problems of contemporary
jurisprudence and especially the typology of constitutional issues as it relates to due process and its requirements.

Criminal Jurisprudence

END

Criminal Procedure II

LAWJ 05312:

This course will examine the legal procedures by which the criminal justice system operates. Students will assess United
States Supreme Court opinions so as to explore issues related to the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Eighthm, and Fourteenth
Amendments to the Constitution, including pre-trial processes, speedy trial, the prosecution function, bail, the
identification of suspects, the right to counsel, the adjudication process, the law of confessions and interrogation, and the
privilege against compelled selp-incrimination. This course has two primary objectives. The first is to introduce students to
the analysis of judicial opinions, a primary sourse of law in the American legal system. The second is to become familiar with
both the fundamental doctrines of constitutional criminal procedure and the important policy issues that emanate
therefrom.

END

Criminal Justice And Social Conflict

LAWJ 05315:

This course covers the major crises in our basic American institutions. Students examine the various aspects of social
mobility, population explosion, social stratification, sex revolution, militarism, and the generation gap as they relate to
problems of social justice in our society.

END

Civil Aspects Of Law Enforcement

LAWJ 05320:

Students undertake an analysis of those areas in civil law with which law enforcement professionals frequently encounter.
Topics include family law, torts, administrative and environmental issues, property disputes, liens, business and consumer
transactions.

END

Drugs And Crime In America

LAWJ 05322:

This course explores and analyzes the relationship between illegal drugs and crime and all the relevant issues and
ramifications. These include, but are not limited to: national and international trafficking, control of the problem,
legalization, and explanations for drug use.

END

Maritime Crime And Criminality

LAWJ 05323:

The course is designed to give the students a broad survey of the myriad issues surrounding crime in the maritime
environment. The course examines the macro and micro factors surrounding deviant behavior that takes place either on the
seas or where the seas are a principle component to the criminal enterprise. Some of the main areas of study include, but are
not limited to: contemporary and early piracy, criminal and corporate negligence within commercial shipping, admiralty law,
marine pollution, illegal commercial fishing, marine insurance fraud, drug and human trafficking, and analysis of state
recreational and commercial vessel laws and policies. Using policy analysis and criminological theory we explore the
underlying causes of maritime crime and policy responses to maritime crime.

END

Sentencing And The Rights Of The Convicted

LAWJ 05324:

Students explore, analyze, and critique the relevant structures, processes, and impacts of criminal sentencing and
sentences. The course is designed to examine critically the relevant political, philosophical and social driving forces of
change and their impacts on the system and society.

END

Comparative And International Criminal Justice

LAWJ 05325:

The course is an introduction to comparative and international criminal justice. It compares the criminal justice system in
the Unit States with other national systems in the five continents and major regions of the world. Areas examined include
crime, criminal law, policing, court processes, and corrections. This course also provides an introduction to the globalization
of crime including terrorism, drug trafficking, human smuggling, and war crimes and the development of domestic and
international efforts in fighting these crimes. The goal of this course is to help students develop comparative and
international perspectives in addressing problems facing the criminal justice system.

END

International Terrorism

LAWJ 05326:

This course explores the historical development of international terrorism and provides a foundational knowledge of
current terrorist groups and their tactics. Specifically, this course introduces the student to the definition, origin, and
evolution of international terrorism; the roles of world-views, ideologies, mind sets, and motivations; and the different types
of terrorism. Students will also study the organization, tactics, operational capabilities and threats posed by terrorist groups.
Finally, the course will introduce the current status of anit- and counterterrorism efforts in the United States.

END

Terrorism in the U.S.

LAWJ 05327:

This course will introduce students to the phenomena of contemporary terrorism and extremism in the U.S. Emphasis will
be placed on extremism as a foundation for terrorist behavior, types of terrorism, and how governments and law
enforcement agencies respond to terrorism. In light of domestic terrorist incidents in Oklahoma City and Fort Hood, and
international terrorist incidents occurring on U.S. soil such as the tragedy of September 11, 2001, as well as domestic hate
crimes, the course will also weave a thread of extremist literature and perspectives throughout the semester. The role of law
enforcement and other public administrative agencies will also be highlighted.

END

Intelligence, Policing, and Counterterrorism

LAWJ 05329:

This course will examine the role of local police in the war on terror within the operations of local, state and federal law
enforcement practices and procedures in response to terror attacks and the threat of terrorism. Addressing issues, such as,
homeland security planning, information gathering, intelligence analysis and surveillance.

END

LAWJ 05330:

This multidisciplinary course examines the principles of justice and their application to the criminal justice system and
society at large. Additionally, a critical examination of significant issues and concerns of world justice will be offered.

Problems In World Justice

END

Criminal Procedure I

LAWJ 05335:

This course will examine the legal procedures by which the criminal justice system operates. Students will assess United
States Supreme Court opinions so as to explore issues related to the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution, including
search and seizure of premises and persons, the arrest and detention of suspected criminals, and the remedies available for
constitutional violations. This course has two primary objectives. The first is to introduce students to the analysis of judicial
opinions, a primary sourse of law in the American legal system. The second is to become familiar with both the fundamental
doctrines of constitutional criminal procedure and the important policy issues that emanate therefrom.

END

Treatment Of The Offender

LAWJ 05337:

This course covers the major therapeutic approaches to the correction of criminal and delinquent behavior and a review of
processes and procedures of corrections and of research on the outcome of various treatment approaches. Students analyze
the ethical and legal problems related to rehabilitation in a correctional setting.

END

LAWJ 05342:

A survey of basic principles and techniques of counseling of offenders, this course includes interviewing, case conferences,
case histories, individual and group counseling, classification procedures, and team treatment participation.

Counseling And Guidance Of The Offender

END

Offender Re-entry, Reintegration & Recidivism

LAWJ 05343:

This course explores the importance of offender re-entry, the barriers to effective reintegration, and what “works and
doesn’t work” in reducing recidivism. This course will further examine the evolution and importance of classification and
assessment instruments in the principles of offender classification. Specific attention will be given to specialized offender
populations including sex offenders, substance users, juveniles, and female offenders, as well as the importance of
implementing evidence based practices.

END

Women, Crime And Criminal Justice

LAWJ 05346:

This course covers the many facets of women, crime and criminal justice, including past and present trends of female crime
along with its relationship to the three major components of the criminal justice system: police, courts and corrections.
Furthermore, this course addresses gender as a significant variable in all aspects of society, both criminal and non-criminal.

END

Mass Murder

LAWJ 05350:

This course introduces students to the social phenomenon of multiple homicide and mass public shootings. It is designed
to provide an advanced understanding of the scholarship in the field, including, but not limited to, the demographic and
background characteristics of offenders and the causes, historical trends and spatial distributions of these crimes. The
course will also address the methodological challenges to the empirical investigation of mass murder, such as how different
definitions and data collection strategies may impact the validity of findings.

END

Criminal Justice Internship I

LAWJ 05356:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112

The course will remove the student from the academic theoretical classroom and place the student into a rich blend of
practical field experiences in various criminal justice or similar agencies. The student must follow strict guidelines set forth
to uphold University and agency rules, policies and expectations.

END

Criminal Justice Internship II

LAWJ 05357:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112

This course provides students with an additional opportunity to pursue practical or research experience in a criminal
justice setting. Students may continue with a previously approved internship in a different area of criminal justice. This
course is not to replace Criminal Justice Internship I (LAWJ 05356) but is intended to allow students additional
opportunities for field experience. Students are advised to complete Criminal Justice Internship I (LAWJ 05356) prior to
enrolling in this course. Students are also encouraged to discuss this course with the internship coordinator prior to
enrolling.

END

Introduction To Juvenile Justice

LAWJ 05361:

This course covers the history and philosophy of the juvenile justice system, which includes the development of the system
through the 19th and 20th centuries and the decisions rendered by the United States Supreme Court. The student also
scrutinize the various steps in the police, courts and corrections stages of the juvenile justice system.

END

Critical Issues in American Law Enforcement

LAWJ 05364:

This course introduces students to the most topical issues in the law enforcement field today. Students are introduced the
current and innovative law enforcement tactics and managerial philosophies including problem-oriented policing, hot spots
policing and intelligence-led policing. The course focuses on understanding what “works” in policing to reduce crime and
disorder while also considering potential negative side effects that different policing strategies may elicit. The course also
covers topics such as the current trends in police technologies, the role of crime analysis in policing, police-community
relations, police legitimacy and the use of force.

END

LAWJ 05367:

This course covers the nature and varieties of justice, including numerous historical perspectives on justice and the
relationship between justice and society.

Theories Of Justice

END

Theories Of Crime And Criminality

LAWJ 05369:

Prerequisites: LAWJ 05175 and 6 credits of Law and Justice Courses

In this course students explore the extent of crime and delinquency in the United States and the full range of relevant
theories of causation. They also synthesize and apply appropriate theories to such concepts and topics as race, social class,
gangs, drugs, family, schools, and neighborhoods.

END

Theories Of Crime And Criminality - Wi

LAWJ 05370:

This is a writing intensive course in which students explore the extent of crime and delinquency in the United States and
the full range of relevant theories of causation. They also synthesize and apply appropriate theories to such concepts and
topics as race, social class, gangs, drugs, family, schools, and neighborhoods.

END

The "Political Prisoner"

LAWJ 05379:

This course examines the causes and significance of the political prisoner concept on the criminal justice system generally
and the U.S. prison systems specifically. The course deals with varying perceptions of different segments of the population
about the existence and scope of this phenomenon in depth.

END

Criminal Justice Research

LAWJ 05380:

Prerequisites: LAWJ 05369

Students study the basic principles of research and statistics. This course undertakes a review of contemporary criminal
justice research projects, emphasizing evaluation of journal studies and basic planning and writing of the research paper.

END

Crime Mapping and Crime Analysis I

LAWJ 05381:

This course introduces students to the fundamentals of crime mapping and crime analysis. This hands on course teaches
students how to use databases, spreadsheets and other tools to analyze crime, produce crime analysis products for police
commanders and how to effectively communicate analysis results to decision-makers. Emphasis is placed on using the
analyses that are learned to influence the thinking of police decision-makers so that they can implement effective responses
to crime and disorder problems.

END

LAWJ 05382:

Crime Mapping and Crime Analysis II

Prerequisites: LAWJ 05381 and GEOG 16260 or GEOG 16260 (may be taken concurrently)

This course teaches students advanced crime analysis methods. This course builds on the skills acquired in Crime Mapping
and Crime Analysis I. This hands on course teaches students how to operate a Geographic Information System (GIS) to
produce crime maps and analyze geographic crime data. Emphasis is placed on using the analyses that are learned to
influence the thinking of police decision-makers so that they can implement effective responses to crime and disorder
problems.

END

Criminal Justice Administration

LAWJ 05392:

This course provides upper level students with the concepts, theories, and principles of managing and administering
criminal justice organizations. The content of the course is applied to police, courts, and corrections agencies and gives the
student a total system approach to the subject.

END

The Incarceration Experience

LAWJ 05395:

This course focuses on the exploration of various aspects of incarcerating criminals. It includes the history of
incarceration, the prisonization process, prison subcultures, violence and victimization, and the underground prison
economy.

END

Crime Prevention Analysis

LAWJ 05399:

This course will examine crime prevention strategies, emphasizing situational crime prevention approaches. We will
concentrate on theories that are inextricably linked to crime prevention practices such as lifestyle, rational choice, and
routine activities theories. Using a case study approach, the student will learn a variety of tools for analyzing crime patterns,
developing appropriate prevention responses, and evaluating the effectiveness of the crime prevention technique employed.

END

Law And Human Rights

LAWJ 05401:

Prerequisites: LAWJ 05175 and 6 credits of Law and Justice Courses

This course reviews individual civil rights and liberties in detail with a particular emphasis on federal-state legislation on
discrimination, substantive and procedural due process materials and 1st amendment problems. Specific attention is given to
the role police, courts and correctional systems play in the enforcement and enhancement of such rights.

END

Selected Topics In Criminal Justice

LAWJ 05415:

This course promotes intensive research and analysis in Special Topics in Criminal Justice. Students engage in either
theoretical or applied research in topics that can be mutually agreed upon between faculty and student. Topics will vary but
may include female criminality, XYY theory, insanity, mental health and the justice systems, advanced security systems or
radical criminology.

END

LAWJ 05461:

Prerequisites: LAWJ 05175, LAWJ 05255, LAWJ 05380 andone of: LAWJ 05200, LAWJ 05201, or LAWJ 05202

Seminar In Corrections-Wi

END

Seminar Is Social Justice- Wi

LAWJ 05465:

Prerequisites: LAWJ 05175, LAWJ 05255, LAWJ 05380 andone of: LAWJ 05200, LAWJ 05201, or LAWJ 05202

This seminar is a capstone experience offering in particular depth a number of special areas concerning social justice. The
student will engage in class discussions, conduct research, write papers, and participate in problem solving examinations, all
of which will be centered around a variety of aspects of social justice.

END

Seminar In Law - Wi

LAWJ 05467:

Prerequisites: LAWJ 05175, LAWJ 05255, LAWJ 05380 andone of: LAWJ 05200, LAWJ 05201, or LAWJ 05202

This seminar is a capstone experience offering in particular depth a number of special areas concerning law and the court
system. The student will engage in class discussions, conduct research, write papers, and participate in problem solving
examinations, all of which will be centered around a variety of aspects of the law/court process.

END

Seminar In Police Science - WI

LAWJ 05468:

Prerequisites: LAWJ 05175, LAWJ 05255, LAWJ 05380 andone of: LAWJ 05200, LAWJ 05201, or LAWJ 05202

This seminar covers a wide variety of police science topics, including constitutional review and police process,
investigation and forensic problems, special problems in the criminal law and its enforcement, and any other appropriate
senior level topics in police studies. Students are expected to participate in a research paper, design, or project and to
present oral presentations.

END

Seminar In Law/Justice - Wi

LAWJ 05469:

Prerequisites: LAWJ 05175, LAWJ 05255, LAWJ 05380, one of: LAWJ 05200, LAWJ 05201, or LAWJ 05202 and senior standing.

This seminar will cover topics relating to how law and justice are put into practice by the police, courts, and corrections
system. Important issues affecting society and the criminal justice system as a whole will be examined in depth. Students will
be expected to read scholarly work exploring these issues; participate in class discussions; conduct library research; write
short, informal memos and a senior level research paper; present oral reports on their research; and demonstrate their
understanding of assigned readings and the research reported by classmates in a final examination.

END

LAWJ 05479:

Seminar In Police Science - Wi

END

Business Perspectives

BUS 01105:

Providing an overview of the business functions, students will explore the impact of acceleration of change and
environment complexity on contemporary business organizations. This course will not meet any major requirement for
majors offered by the Rohrer College of Business.

END

Special Topics In Business Administration

BUS 01600:

Students will study advanced level topics in specific disciplines as identified through participation in indepth seminars on
topics to be determined by faculty in consultation with the Graduate Committee of the College of Business. Students will
complete research or projects on specialized topics in various disciplines in Business Administration. Students may take
each topic only once. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Management of Human Resources

HRM 06302:

Prerequisites: Junior standing 57 credits required

This course examines the human resource management system: staffing and organization, recruitment, employee
development, motivation, performance evaluation, management-labor relations, remuneration and security.

END

Recruitment and Selection

HRM 06315:

Prerequisites: HRM 06302 or PSY 08220

This course focuses on the human resource recruitment and selection functions of organizations. Topics covered include
recruitment, organizational chocie, validation, interviewing, and testing. Both the theoretical foundations fo the
recruitment and selection functions as well as the practical application of these activites are presented.

END

Human Resource Information Systems

HRM 06318:

Prerequisites: MIS 02334 or HRM 06302 or PSY 08220

This course will provide students with a working knowledge of the structure, use, and evaluation of human resource
information systems

END

HRM 06319:

Prerequisites: Junior standing, 57 credits required

This course presents human resource management topics related to recent development in HRM practice and research.

Special Topics in Human Resource Management

END

Principles of Training and Training Management

HRM 06420:

Prerequisites: MGT 06300 or HRM 06302 or PSY 08220 or FNDS 21230 and Admission to any Business major or the Human
Resource Management minor or CUGS in Training and Development

This course will expose students to various theories and methodologies used to plan, design, conduct and evaluate training
and management development programs in organizations. The learning experience within the course is designed to provide
the student with the knowledge, information and skills required to develop and implement a training program. The course
material offers a practical ¿how-to¿ approach to training and development, as well as managing the training function. Each
student in the course will participate in the development of a training program or module, which will be presented and
critiqued at the end of the semester.

END

Management of Compensation

HRM 06425:

Prerequisites: HRM 06302 or PSY 08220

This course will expose students to various theories and methodologies used to plan, design, conduct and evaluate training
and management development programs in organizations. The learning experience within the course is designed to provide
the student with the knowledge, information and skills required to develop and implement a training program. The course
material offers a practical ¿how-to¿ approach to training and development, as well as managing the training function. Each
student in the course will participate in the development of a training program or module, which will be presented and
critiqued at the end of the semester.

END

Labor and Employee Relations

HRM 16401:

Prerequisites: HRM 06302 or PSY 08220

This advanced course studies union-management relations. The course provides students with the essentials of labor law,
collective bargaining, contract administration, and dispute settlement. The course uses case studies and simulations
extensively.

END

Legal Aspects of Human Resource Management

HRM 98335:

Prerequisites: MGT 98242 and (HRM 06302 or PSY 08220)

This course introduces students to three areas of human resources management which are extensively regulated by federal
and state legislation. Legislation studied includes the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA), the Equal Employment
Opportunity Act (EEO), and the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA). The course emphasizes practical
applications to the human resource function.

END

Legal Aspects of Human Resource Management (Wi)

HRM 98337:

Prerequisites: MGT 98242 and (HRM 06302 or PSY 08220)

This course introduces students to three areas of human resources management which are extensively regulated by federal
and state legislation. Legislation studied includes the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA), the Equal Employment
Opportunity Act (EEO), and the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA). The course emphasizes practical
applications to the human resource function.

END

Global Business Simulation

MGT 01414:

Prerequisites: Senior standing plus matriculation in the Global Business and Leadership specialization of the BS in Business

This course is designed to provide students with the opportunity to experience many of the problems of risk and
uncertainty that managers face when making decisions in global business environments. Students work in teams while
managing a simulated corporation in a highly competitive business environment. Students are challenged to use and improve
their business and leadership skills utilizing knowledge from previous global business courses.

END

Professional, Legal and Managerial Responsibilities

MGT 01510:

Admission into the MBA program or admission into the COGS in Business.
In that business leaders have become personally and professionally responsible for the legal and ethical behaviors of the
individuals within their organizations, the need for formal training in ethical and legal decision making is essential. In this
course students will learn how to effectively apply a variety of legal and ethical frameworks within the global marketplace.
Students will also learn appropriate and effective legal and ethical issue reporting practices, principles and responsibilities.

END

Introductory Management Perspectives for the 21st Century

MGT 06123:

Prerequisites: Freshmen enrolled in a major offered by the Department of Management and Entrepreneurship or Permission of the
College

The objective of this course is to have students explore current theory, practices, and issues in management from the
perspective of the management functions of planning, organizing, leading, controlling, and monitoring.

END

Introduction to Sports Management

MGT 06222:

The emphasis of this new course will be on core management principles and their application in a sporting context.
Particular emphasis will be on the conceptualization of sport strategic planning, sport organizational culture, sport
organizational structure, sport human resource management, sport leadership, sport governance, sport financial
management, sport marketing, sport performance management, sport management theory, sport media, and the effective
and efficient manager in a sport organizations or industry.

END

Organizational Behavior

MGT 06300:

Prerequisites: Junior standing

This course examines human relations in management. The course studies the concern for both task and process in the
light of structure, goals and human relationships found in organized efforts. It also covers the application of new
management theories in the areas of motivation, leadership and group problem-solving by a variety of means, including
simulation, case studies, and role playing.

END

Organizational Change and Development

MGT 06304:

Prerequisites: MGT 06300 or PSY 08220 or CMS 04260 and Admission to any Business major or CUGS in Management &
Leadership or CUGS in Training & Development

This course studies factors that facilitate or inhibit organizational change as well as research findings and theory which deal
with methods for diagnosing organizational climate, and selecting and utilizing techniques for bringing about change and
overcoming resistance to change. It also analyzes and evaluates roles and strategies used by change agents to initiate
structure and direct organizational change.

END

Operations Management

MGT 06305:

Prerequisites: Grades of C- or better in: STAT 02260 and(MATH 01130 or MATH 03125 or MATH 01140)

This course provides a critical study of the operational functions of the business enterprise. Its topics include capital costs
and investment criteria, plant location and layout, process planning and production design, job designs, work methods and
cost controls.

END

Organizational Behavior (Wi)

MGT 06309:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and 57 credits required

This course examines human relations in management. The course studies the concern for both task and process in the
light of structure, goals and human relationships found in organized efforts. It also covers the application of new
management theories in the areas of motivation, leadership and group problem-solving by a variety of means, including
simulation, case studies, and role playing.

END

Leadership and Supervision for Managers

MGT 06310:

Prerequisites: MGT 06300 and Admission to the Management major or CUGS in Management and Leadership

The course is designed for undergraduate business students. Course content will cover the theories of business leadership
and supervision- with the focus on first line supervisors. Students will focus on the theory and acquisition of various business
leadership and supervisory tasks and skills necessary to work with other business managers in a global market world and to
supervise workers with diverse backgrounds. These business skills will include establishing workplace goals, organizing work
units for productivity, conducting interviews, giving feedback to subordinate employees, designing and implementing
employee motivation programs, and supervising workteams. By the end of the course, students will be able to effectively
diagnose the complex dynamics of leadership and supervision in business environments and take action as leaders and
supervisors to improve individual and organization performance.

END

Foundations of Analytics

MGT 06311:

Prerequisites: STAT 02260 and (MATH 03125 or MATH 01130) and Admission to the Management major or CUGS in Business
Analytics

The course introduces students with fundamental concepts and tools needed to understand the emerging role of business
analytics in organizations and to effectively use analytical tools in business decision making. It takes a balanced approach in
viewing business analytics from descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive perspectives.

END

Selected Topics in Management I

MGT 06312:

Prerequisites: 45 credits required

The course will provide students with the opportunity to learn about and respond to situations which are causing changes
in the current business environment. Students will collect business information about the change and analyze it, make
business decisions, discuss implementation of these decisions, and modification of those decisions in these situations.
Students will also have the opportunity to become thoroughly familiar with all of the business aspects of the industries in
South Jersey in which most of them will be employed.

END

Selected Topics in Management II

MGT 06313:

Prerequisites: 45 credits required

The course will provide students with the opportunity to become thoroughly familiar with all of the business aspects of the
industries in the local economic environment in which most of them will be employed. Students will become knowledgeable
about a specific industry in the multiple business facets of accoutint, finance, human resources, use of information systems,
facilities, etc. Industries can include the gaming and hospitality industries, the manufacturing sector, the health-care
industry.

END

Managing Teams in Organizations

MGT 06321:

Prerequisites: MGT 06300

This course is designed for undergraduate students in the Management program. Course content will cover the theories of
teamwork, team development, team dynamic, team creativity, team decision making, team productivity, team
communication, team performance, team evaluation, team feedback and team leadership in business. By the end of the
course, students will be able to effectively diagnose the complex dynamics of team leadership in business organizational
environments and take action as team members and team leaders to improve industry or business organizations.

END

MGT 06330:

Managing International Business

Prerequisites: MGT 06300, ECON 04101 and ECON 04102

Students will learn about the evolution and current environment for international trade and investment and understand the
challenges and issues facing business organizations with international operations. They will apply these insights to the
analysis of actual business decision-making situations by means of case studies and research projects.

END

Analytics for Quality Management

MGT 06350:

Prerequisites: STAT 02260

The course is about building organizations that are continuously trying to achieve and sustain organizational excellence by
using quality management principles, tools, and paradigms. This course will aim to improve the vitality of organizations to
make them customer focused. The focus is on developing and implementing behavioral and quantitative tools to deliver the
“best net value” to customers. In this course, students will investigate the aspects of forming organizational alliances and
consensus thinking; deriving functional synergies; using quality analytics such as Six Sigma, Design of Experiment, Control
Charts, etc.; developing customer orientation, facilitating teamwork, and will be exposed to a real-world perspective.

END

Managerial Data Analysis

MGT 06354:

Prerequisites: MATH 03125, STAT 02260 and 57 credits required

This course is designed to acquaint management students with the knowledge to collect and analyze business information
from a variety of sources and under various conditions of uncertainty in order to analyze this data in order to increase the
productivity and effectiveness of the businesses by which they are employed. The focus is placed upon the ability to collect
relevant business data and report the findings of their analysis in order that the findings may be applied in specific business
situations. The emphasis will be on the use of realistic business data, business analysis processes, business applications, and
business reporting techniques.

END

MGT 06361:

Supervised Internship

Prerequisites: MGT 06300 and 57 credits required

This course includes field experience in government, business, industry or non-profit organizations. Trainees are given
assignments that prepare them for productive employment upon graduation. The learning process is monitored by the
College of Business faculty members.

END

MGT 06375:

Managing Services

Prerequisites: MGT 06304 and MGT 06309

This course is oriented to service industries, such as medical services, financial institutions, airlines, transportation
companies and retail establishments. The course covers understanding services, designing and delivering services, managing
capacity and demand, service quality, customer service, human resources in service organizations, information systems and
service strategies.

END

Sustainable Business

MGT 06381:

Students will examine the notion of “sustainable business” in this course. Students will learn about different types of ‘green’
and sustainable businesses and evaluate many case studies of businesses that have been successful in improving their
environmental and social performance while also remaining profitable. Students will develop their own approaches to
evaluating the sustainability of a business while also learning about emerging norms and frameworks. Students will examine
sustainability as a concept impacting all aspects of a business, from operations and product design to finance, marketing, and
human resources management. Students will continue to develop entrepreneurial skillsets and mindsets as they approach
solutions to sustainability challenges. The impacts of “green” industries, products, and business practices are also examined.
This course may be offered online.

END

MGT 06401:

Independent Study - Management

END

Business Policy

MGT 06402:

Prerequisites: MIS 02334 and MGT 98242, MKT 0920 0, MGT 06300, MGT 06305, FIN 04300 and Senior Standing

This capstone course in business policy provides students with an opportunity to integrate what they have learned in
separate business fields and use this knowledge in the analysis of complex business problems. There is an emphasis on the
skills of identifying, analyzing and solving problems which are not pre-judged as being marketing problems, finance
problems, etc. Students are encouraged to consider issues from the viewpoint of general management rather than as a
functional specialist or researcher.

END

MGT 06404:

Quality Management

Prerequisites: MGT 06305 and 57 credits required

This course is designed to acquaint students with a fundamental knowledge of the principals and techniques of quality
management and operational control. Emphasis will be given to systems and the function of quality, technical methods and
tools used in quality management, quality improvement and problem solving, and managerial issues of quality management
as a new paradigm. Practical application with actual case studies for both product- and service-oriented fields will be
provided.

END

Business Management Simulation

MGT 06405:

Prerequisites: FIN 04300, MKT 09200, MGT 06310, MGT 06311,MGT 06330 and WA 01408

This course is designed to provide students with the opportunity to experience many of the problems of risk and
uncertainty that managers face when making decisions in the real world. Students work in teams while managing a computer
simulated corporation in a highly competitive international business environment. Students are challenged to use and
improve their business and leadership skills utilizing knowledge from previous business courses.

END

Improving Business Processes

MGT 06406:

Prerequisites: MGT 06305

This course introduces the fundamental Lean Six Sigma principles that underlay modern continuous improvement
approaches for industry, government and other organizations. Lean emerged from the Japanese automotive industry, and is
focused on the creation of value through the relentless elimination of waste. Six Sigma is a quality system developed at
Motorola which focuses on elimination of variation from all processes. The basic principles have been applied to a wide
range of organizations and sectors to improve quality, productivity, customer satisfaction, employee satisfaction,
time-to-market and financial performance.

END

Business Analytics

MGT 06407:

Prerequisites: MGT 06305 and MIS 02234

This course provides an introduction to the field of business analytics, which has been defined as the extensive use of
business data, analytical tools, exploratory and predictive skills, and fact-based management to drive decisions and actions.
The development and usse of business analytics is discussed. This course will use Enterprise Resource Planning systems as a
platform to retrieve the data and draw meaningful information for business analytics.

END

Visual Business Intelligence

MGT 06408:

Prerequisites: MGT 06305 and MIS 02234 and Admission to any Business major or CUGS in Business Analytics

Thanks to the increasing amount of valuable data in every corner of our society, the visualization industry is growing
rapidly and visual business intelligence is becoming a crucial skill for knowledge workers. Effective analysis of data through
visualization will become more and more crucial because it is almost impossible to understand big, messy data without any
visual aid. This course will explore effective ways of consuming business data by looking back at the history of visualization,
by analyzing and criticizing existing visualizations, and by applying our own visualization with data from business cases or a
research problem.

END

Business Field Research Experience

MGT 06430:

Prerequisites: MGT 06305, and 57 credits required

Students will choose a business activity approved by their instructor and do an in-depth research study of that activity. It
will include library research as well as interviews with local businesses. Students will be guided by the instructor with the
help of a classroom component during which students will share their research and experience with other students.

END

Designing, Developing, And Leading High Performance Organizations

MGT 06500:

Students will study and develop skills in interpersonal behavior in organizations and groups. They will learn about issues in
leadership, how groups function, elements of power and influence, conflict management, management of time and stress,
creative and rational problem solving in groups. In addition, they will study theories of motivation and methods of
empowerment in organizations.

END

Advanced Operations Management And Strategy

MGT 06501:

Prerequisites: MBA Foundation Courses

This course is designed to familiarize students with the complexities of operating a manufacturing, as well as a service,
organization. The focus is primarily on gaining a competitive edge by improving functions of operations management.
Concepts and tools pertaining to business forecasting, operations decision-making, resources allocation, location and
capacity planning, inventory control and management, facility layouts, scheduling, project management, and quality control
and management will be covered. Case studies and team projects will also be used to provide practical applications in a
realistic business context.

END

International Business And Society

MGT 06502:

This course addresses numerous aspects of the increasingly global business environment and implications for business
organizations and key stakeholders. Frameworks for comparing political, legal, social, economic, and governmental
differences across nations are utilized. Macro issues include trade theories, trade regimes, roles of governments and global
institutions. Strategies and structures adopted by various types of international firms and functional approaches to
international finance, management, and marketing are also included.

END

Organization Development

MGT 06503:

Students study the application behavioral science in the management of planned organizational change and development.
In addition to the analysis of issues facing the change agent, students also develop skills in implementing and intervening in
the effort to improve organizational effectiveness. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Global Leadership And Organization Culture

MGT 06520:

The course is designed for graduate business students. Course content will cover the theories of business leadership and
the focus of this course will be on leadership from a variety of perspectives--organizational leadership in the external
environment, as well as leadership at the top, middle and lower levels inside organizations. Students will focus on the theory
and implementation of various business leadership tasks and responsibilities including working with other leaders in a
multinational world, supervising workers with diverse backgrounds. These business skills will include establishing workplace
goals, organizing work units for productivity, conducting interviews, giving feedback to subordinate employees, designing
and implementing employee motivation programs, changing organization culture, the capacity to lead globally, leading work
teams and managing workforce diversity. By the end of the course, students will be able to effectively diagnose the complex
dynamics of leadership in business environments and take action as leaders and to improve individual and organization
performance.

END

Strategic Planning For Operating Managers

MGT 06601:

This course prepares the operating manager for the responsibilities of performing strategic planning. The course will
identify what goes into and how strategic planning is performed. Strategy formation and evaluation will be assisted by
computer decision models and management games. The interrelationships of organizational units and pro-active
management posture with respect to environmental forces will be stressed. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Managing Organizational Strategy

MGT 06629:

Prerequisites: FIN 04500 Financial Decision Making and (MGT 06515 Employee Engagement and Performance or MGT 06500
Designing, Developing, and Leading High Performance Organizations) and (MGT 06567 Responsible Leadership or MGT 01510
Professional Legal and Managerial Responsibilities) and (MGT 07550 Operations Analytics or MGT 07500 Prescriptive Analytics or
MGT 07600 Predictive Analytics) and (MKT 09511 Marketing Management Fundamentals or MKT 09500 Marketing Management)

As understanding organizations in the context of their general and competitive environments is vital, future managers must
learn how to utilize the perspectives and frameworks designed for strategic analyses and decision making. In this course
students will learn how to conduct analyses across organizational functions and levels and effectively manage goals and
strategies for different types of organizations.

END

Prospective Analytics

MGT 07500:

Prerequisites: Admission to the MBA program

Students in this course will learn knowledge and methods for prescriptive analytics that include optimization,
decision-analysis, and simulation. These techniques and knowledge can be applied not only to improvement of operations
but also healthcare and service industries. Prescriptive analytics is essential in guiding managers and business professionals
to understand current and future situations and to derive concrete decision alternatives from the business data. Using a
fundamental and applied methods in prescriptive analytics, the course charts a course for moving forward on the horizon of
the immediate and long-term future.

END

MGT 07600:

Predictive Analytics

Prerequisites: Admission to the MBA program or CAGS in Management

This course is designed to acquaint the graduate student with the advanced statistical forecasting techniques. Upon
completion of the course, the student should be able to identify a forecasting problem, gather data and use computerized
statistical packages to obtain solutions, analyze results, determine the validity and reliability of the model, and if necessary,
recommend alternative methods to solve the model. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Legal Environment of Business

MGT 98242:

Students in this course examine the legal process and the legal environment within which business must operate, as well as
the interrelationship of government and business. Students develop an understanding of the methods by which legal
decisions are formulated as they affect both individual rights and business transactions.

END

BUS 01303:

Business Practicum

END

Issues in Business: Directed Research (WI)

BUS 01401:

Prerequisites: COMP 01.111, COMP 01112, BUS 01.101COLLEGE COMP 1 & 2 AND BUSINESS PERSPECTIVESOPEN ONLY

TO LIBERAL STUDIES: HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCEMAJORS
An upper-division course for students in Liberal Studies: Humanities & Social Sciences, Sequence B Perspectives of
Business, Issues in Business: Directed Research is a course that focuses on the current issues and trends in business as found
in the business media. The course is designed to allow students to explore areas of personal interest through the collection
of research and the presentation of such material in written and spoken formats.

END

Business Consultancy

BUS 01444:

Prerequisites: MGT 06402 (Allows Concurrent Registration) AND Senior Standing

This elective, project-based course is designed as a multi-disciplinary course targeting the inclusion of a variety of
disciplines with the goal of assisting organizations with a business problem while providing the students with the
opportunity to develop a variety of diverse, career-ready skills. Students work in multi-disciplinary teams to consult with
businesses in various projects. Client-team meetings occur regularly throughout the semester.

END

Research Methods and Ethical Issues in Data Analytics

DA 01350:

Prerequisites: STAT 02260

This course will introduce students to methods for conducting meaningful inquiry and analysis. Students will gain an
overview of the research process including developing research questions and designing analytical studies to answer research
questions. The course will provide an overview of the important concepts of data collection, data management as well as
ethical considerations for data analysts in each aspect of the research process.

END

Risk Simulation Queuing

DA 01451:

Prerequisites: STAT 02260 and CS 01104 and CS 04210

This course covers three modeling techniques. Students will learn how to construct and implement simulations to model
the uncertainty in decision input variables (e.g. price, demand, etc.) and supplement the overall estimate of interest by a risk
interval of possible other outcomes using risk simulation, model the variability in arrivals over time and ensuing queues using
queuing theory, and how to employ decision trees to incorporate information derived from models to actually make optimal
decisions

END

Forecasting Analytics

DA 01453:

Prerequisites: STAT 02260 and CS 01104 and CS 04210

This course focuses on business forecasting methods: regression models, smoothing methods including Moving Average
and Exponential Smoothing, and Autoregressive models. It also discusses enhancements such as second-layer models and
ensembles, and various issues encountered in practice.

END

Customer and Client Analytics

DA 01454:

Prerequisites: STAT 02260 and CS 01104 and CS 04210

In this course students will work through a customer analytics project from beginning to end, using R. They will start by
gaining an understanding of the problem and the context, and continue to clean, prepare and explore the relevant data.
They’ll work on feature engineering, handling dates, summarization, and how to work with the customer lifecycle concept in
data analysis. The course culminates with a report that they will write, and a recommendation that they will prepare for a
hypothetical company.

END

Integrated Business Software Tools-RS

MIS 02150:

Students will expand their use of integrated software tools that include database management systems, spreadsheets, and
other business applications. They will apply these tools to actual business decision-making situations by means of case
studies and research projects.

END

Enterprise Resource Planning Systems Laboratory

MIS 02210:

Prerequisites: MIS 02233

Students will learn the role of enterprise resource planning systems (ERPS) in supporting key business processes. There will
be hands-on computer laboratory exercises where students will gain experience in executing key business processes using a
simulated ERP environment.

END

Principles Of Management Information Systems

MIS 02233:

Prerequisites: Sophomore standing

Today, information systems are an integral part of all business activities and careers. This course is designed to introduce
students to contemporary information systems and demonstrate how these systems are used throughout organizations. The
course will focus on the key components of 
information systems - people, software, hardware, data, and
telecommunications, and how these components can be integrated and managed to create competitive advantage. Students
will also gain hands-on experience with business software tools commonly applied to business data analysis and database
management.

END

Management Information Systems

MIS 02234:

Information systems are an integral part of all business activities and careers. This course is designed to introduce students
to contemporary information systems and demonstrate how these systems are used throughout organizations. This course
focuses on the key components of information systems - organizations, people, software, hardware, data, and
telecommunications - and how these components can be integrated and managed to create competitive advantage. Students
will gain hands-on experience with business software tools commonly applied to business data analysis and database
management. It is expected that students entering this class have completed College Algebra or its equivalent.

END

Emerging Technologies I

MIS 02301:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

As future business leaders, our students need to stay abreast of emerging technologies and the potential impact that
technology might have on organizations. The purpose of this course is to provide students the opportunity to develop new
knowledge/skills in emerging technologies. As such, course content will be determined at the time of offering. Specific

END

Emerging Technologies II

MIS 02302:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

As future business leaders, our students need to stay abreast of emerging technologies and the potential impact that
technology might have on organizations. The purpose of this course is to provide students the opportunity to develop new
knowledge/skills in emerging technologies. As such, course content will be determined at the time of offering. Specific

END

Business Applications of Blockchain

MIS 02305:

This course surveys the application of blockchain technology across business functions in organizations. These uses span
from digital currency to the execution of smart contracts. The versatility of the technology to control, secure, and execute
transactions makes its use ubiquitous in the transformation of business processes.

END

Integrated Business Processes & Enterprise Resource Planning

MIS 02310:

Prerequisites: MIS 02210 OR MIS 02234, and Junior standing, major or minor in business.

Students will learn the various key business processes, the role of enterprise resource planning systems (ERPS) in
integrating and supporting these processes, and the many challenges an organization faces during implementation and
management of such systems. There will be key hands-on computer laboratory exercises where students wil gain experience
in executing the key business steps and extracting meaningful information about the business processes using a
well-regarded ERP software solution.

END

Principles of Information Security

MIS 02315:

Prerequisites: 60 credit hours completed

This course is designed to introduce students to the principals of information security and demonstrate how it can be used
to reduce the risk of using information technology in business and our personal lives. The course will cover topics in
information security such as policies, standards, best practices, risk management, legal and ethical security issues, and
security of computer systems. In addition to reviewing the topic of information security, students will review real examples
and case studies of common issues with information security. As a result, students will obtain valuable knowledge and skills
for making their business and personal lives more secure.

END

Information Systems Risk Management

MIS 02318:

Prerequisites: MIS 02315 or CS 01211

This course will provide students with a comprehensive understanding of how to identify and mitigate security risks within
an organization’s networks, systems, and data. Students will gain the skills needed to strategically lead an organization
through the complexities of the information systems risk management landscape.

END

Seminar In Management Information Systems

MIS 02320:

Prerequisites: 57 credits completed

A seminar course providing a broad overview of information system management technology, this course emphasizes
investigation and application of state-of-the-art concepts. Topics will be relevant to current trends in the industry.

END

Principles Of System Design

MIS 02322:

Prerequisites: 57 credits completed

This course explores the methodology and techniques in analysis and design of computer information systems. The
systems analyst, the architect of information systems, is a liaison between user and programmer. The roles and
responsibilities of the systems analyst are emphasized at all stages of the systems development life cycle.

END

Project Management

MIS 02325:

Prerequisites: Junior and senior standing. Must be enrolled in the College of Business or the CUGS in Project Management

In this course, students will learn the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) as put forward by the
professional association, the Project Management Institute (PMI). Students will not only study the various phases and
documents of project management, they will also have experience creating each of the documents for a given project.

END

Network Management

MIS 02327:

Prerequisites: 57 credits completed

This course introduces students concepts associated with managing a network within a business setting. Furthermore, to
solve business problems, students will apply theoretical concepts to fully design, specify, and justify networking solutions.

END

Agile Project Management

MIS 02328:

This course explores the core values and principles of agile project management. Agile is one of the most popular
approaches to project management due to its flexibility, adaptability, and high level of customer collaboration. The agile
project management philosophy is grounded in the notion that a project can be continuously improved upon throughout its
life cycle, with changes being made quickly and responsively. This approach makes it easier for project teams to adapt to
changing priorities, respond to problems that arise, and cut down on cost, time, and inefficiencies.

END

Project Management Associate Exam Prep

MIS 02329:

Prerequisites: MIS 02325 Corequisites: MIS 02328

This course provides in-depth coverage of the project management domains that students need to be competent in to take
the Project Management Institute’s (PMI) Certified Associate in Project Management (CAPM) exam.

END

Business Systems

MIS 02330:

Prerequisites: 57 credits required

This course introduces students to the different tiers of an information system, with specific emphasis placed on design
concepts and tools used to develop the presentation tier for web-enabled business information systems.

END

MIS 02331:

This course introduces the basic concepts, principles, methods, implementation techniques, and applications of data
mining, with a focus on practical skills for applying data mining techniques to solve real-world business problems.

Data Mining for Business

END

E-Business - Information Systems Perspectives

MIS 02332:

Prerequisites: 57 credits required

Students will explore the issues involved in e-business from a business, technological and societal viewpoint. Topics will
include: B2C and B2B e-business models and strategies, concepts for building an effective e-business site, e-business security
and encryption, e-payment systems, legal, ethical and international issues in e-commerce.

END

E-Business - Information Systems Perspectives - WI

MIS 02333:

Prerequisites:COMP 01112 and Junior standing

Students will explore the issues involved in e-business from a business, technological and societal viewpoint. Topics will
include: B2C and B2B e-business models and strategies, concepts for building an effective e-business site, e-business security
and enctryption, e-payment systems, legal, ethical and international issues in e-commerce.

END

Applied Database Technologies

MIS 02337:

Prerequisites: Must be enrolled in the BA in Computing & Informatics Major or the CUGS in MIS; May not be enrolled as the
following classifications: Freshman or Sophomore

This course covers the practical aspects of relational database systems, including database modeling using ER and EER
diagrams, physical database design, the relational database query language SQL, normal forms, database integrity and
transaction management. Includes a project involving an RDBMS.

END

Design Of Database Systems

MIS 02338:

Prerequisites: Junior standing and enrollment in MIS Major or MIS Minor or CUGS Business Analytics or CUGS Information
Systems

This course covers the principles, practices, design, and development of database management systems (DBMS). More
specifically, it focuses on logical modeling, physical data modeling, normalization, and database query languages. This course
provides students with hands-on experience of designing, creating, and querying relational databases using a relational
database management system (RDBMS) with emphasis on Structured Query Language (SQL) for data access and
manipulation.

END

Business Intelligence

MIS 02339:

Prerequisites: MIS 02338 with Minimum Grade of C-

This course covers the concepts, principles, and tools of Business Intelligence (BI) as components and functionality of
information systems. It explores how business problems can be solved effectively by using operational data to create Data
Warehouses (DW) to gain new insights into organizational operations. More specifically, it introduces the approaches, roles
and responsibilities in the design and implementation of a Data Warehouse. This course leverages a portfolio of SQL Server
tools to provide hands-on experience in implementing a reporting solution through assignments, lab exercises and projects

END

MIS 02344:

Prerequisites: 57 credits completed

Supervised Internship In Management Information Systems

END

Business Web Applications

MIS 02428:

Prerequisites: Senior standing as a Rohrer Collegeof Business major or minor and have completed MIS 02330and have completed or be
currently enrolled in MIS 02338

Students will use web development tools and technologies, including markup languages, scripting languages, programming
languages, and databases, to create dynamic web applications that integrate the different tiers of a business information
system.

END

MIS Capstone Experience

MIS 02450:

Prerequisites: Senior Standing as a MIS Major and have completed MIS 02322 AND MIS 02338 & have completed or be currently
enrolled in MIS 02325

This course is an accumulative learning experience of the material covered in the MIS program and the introduction of IS
strategy so that students can interpret the need to identify and solve business issues with technology. An integrated class
project is used to understand the impact of information systems on organization objectives and business processes.

END

Issues In Management Information Systems

MIS 02500:

Prerequisites: Admission to the MBA Program oradmission to the COGS in Business oradmission to the COGS in MIS

Information technology and systems are pervasive in business today and will become more so in the future. Therefore, this
course is designed to provide skills for managing this changing environment. The primary focus of the course is on the
management of technology. The management of technology and systems is not left solely to information systems
professionals; it is the responsibility of all managers.

END

Electronic Commerce

MIS 02515:

Prerequisites: Admission to the MBA Program or Admission to Certificate of Graduate Study (COGS) in MIS or Admission to
Certificate of Advanced Graduate Study (CAGS) in MIS

This course will introduce students to electronic business. It will cover such diverse issues as: e-commerce payment
mechanisms, encryption and authentication of data, web assurance, electronic data interchange, legal issues on the web, and
web marketing. There will also be a lab component that will provide students with exposure to and practice in web page
design and creation.

END

Project Management For Engineers

MIS 02526:

In this course, students will learn the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) as put forward by the
professional association, the Project Management Institute (PMI). Students will not only study the various phases and
documents of project management, they will also have experience creating each of the documents for a given project.

END

Special Topics In Management Information Systems

MIS 02599:

Prerequisites: Admission to the MBA Program or Admission to Certificate of Graduate Study (COGS) in MIS or Admission to
Certificate of Advanced Graduate Study (CAGS) in MIS

Students will study advanced level topics in Management Information Systems. The exact topics to be covered will change
over time. Contact the MBA office or the Management and MIS Department for details.

END

Marketing and the Business Environment - RS

MKT 09101:

Prerequisites: No more than 12 earned semester hours (freshman standing) & Admitted to the Marketing, MIS, Supply Chain and
Logistics majors or permission of the marketing department

A required course for freshman majoring in Marketing, MIS, or Supply Chain Logistics. This Rowan Seminar (RS) is
designed to help students adjust to college, provides information needed to be a successful Rowan student, and introduces
students to their chosen program of study. Upon completing the course, students will understand the current trends in
business and scope of marketing in the modern business organizations. The course is limited to freshman students in the
marketing major.

END

MKBIS Engagement and Career Exploration

MKT 09112:

Prerequisites: Admission into the Marketing, MIS,or Supply Chain & Logistics

This is a non-credit course that all Marketing, MIS and Supply Chain Logistics majors are enrolled in each semester. The
course is graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. Each student will be required to complete a set of extracurricular activities in
accordance with the program requirements.

END

MKTBIS Engagement and Career Exploration

MKT 09113:

Prerequisites: Admission to Marketing, MIS or Supply Chain & Logistics

This is a non-credit course that all Marketing, MIS and Supply Chain & Logistics majors are enrolled in each semester. The
course is graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. Each student will be required to complete a set of extracurricular activities in
accordance with the program requirements.

END

Principles Of Marketing

MKT 09200:

Prerequisites: COMP 01105 or COMP 01111 and 12 Credits completed

This course provides an overview of the theory and practice of marketing within a corporate and societal context in a
dynamic environment. The major functions of marketing are covered from the perspective of management strategy seeking
competitive advantage.

END

MKT 09212:

MKTBIS Engagement & Career Exporation

Prerequisites: Admission to Marketing, MIS, or Supply Chain & Logistics

This is a non-credit course that all Marketing, MIS and Supply Chain & Logistics majors are enrolled in each semester. The
course is graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. Each student will be required to complete a set of extracurricular activities in
accordance with the program requirements.

END

MKT 09213:

MKTBIS Engagement & Career Exporation

Prerequisites: Admission to Marketing, MIS, or Supply Chain & Logistics

This is a non-credit course that all Marketing, MIS and Supply Chain & Logistics majors are enrolled in each semester. The
course is graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. Each student will be required to complete a set of extracurricular activities in
accordance with the program requirements.

END

Digital Marketing

MKT 09305:

Prerequisites: MKT 09200 and Junior status

This course examines the Internet and mobile devices as tools to enhance firms’ marketing activities. The course provides
the theoretical understanding of the internet and mobile marketplace necessary to adapt to its many changes and presents
various online and mobile marketing skills to perform vital daily functions.

END

Brand Management

MKT 09307:

Prerequisites: MKT 09200 and Junior or Senior Standing

As brands represent some of the most valuable intangible assets that firms possess, this course explores what brands
represent, why they are important, and what managers should do to build, measure, and manage brand equity. Topics
include the development of brand strategy, the design and implementation of brand marketing programs, the measurement
and interpretation of brand equity, and the growth of brands over time.

END

MKTBIS Engagement & Career Exploration

MKT 09312:

Prerequisites: Admission to Marketing, MIS, or Supply Chain & Logistics

This is a non-credit course that all Marketing, MIS and Supply Chain & Logistics majors are enrolled in each semester. The
course is graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. Each student will be required to complete a set of extracurricular activities in
accordance with the program requirements.

END

MKT 09313:

MKTBIS Engagement & Career Exporation

Prerequisites: Admission to Marketing, MIS, or Supply Chain & Logistics

This is a non-credit course that all Marketing, MIS and Supply Chain & Logistics majors are enrolled in each semester. The
course is graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. Each student will be required to complete a set of extracurricular activities in
accordance with the program requirements.

END

Personal Selling

MKT 09315:

Prerequisites: MKT 09200 and Junior status

This course examines the role of personal selling in the marketing mix. Students learn theory and gain practice in
prospecting, presenting, overcoming objections, closing, and follow-up.

END

Marketing Channels

MKT 09330:

Prerequisites: MKT 09200 and Junior status

This course discusses how channels can be managed strategically to serve as a competitive advantage for the firm. Key
topics include power and conflict within the channel, middlemen, vertical marketing systems and managing channel
members.

END

Management Of Advertising And Promotion

MKT 09350:

Prerequisites: MKT 09200 and Senior status

A project-based learning course, students will learn how to create a promotion plan and apply that knowledge as part of a
group serving a specific client. The course involves at least 6 weeks of extensive project/client work involving the meeting
with clients and outside-of-class meetings with the instructor. The course is available to seniors only (87 or more completed
semester hours).

END

MKT 09360:

Services Marketing

Prerequisites: MKT 09200 and Junior status

The course provides students with an understanding of the unique characteristics of services and the application of
standard marketing tools in service marketing. It emphasizes consumer decision-making, marketing planning, and
development of the marketing mix. Students will apply theoretical knowledge learned in class to real world case studies and
projects.

END

Retailing

MKT 09372:

Prerequisites: MKT 09200 and Junior status

This course examines retailing as marketing distribution strategy. Specifically, the course focuses on the development and
implementation of strategies and tactics in a highly competitive and changing environment. Projects and team-work are a
key component of the course requiring students to engage in field study and report on the findings.

END

Research Methods In Marketing

MKT 09374:

Prerequisites: MKT 09200, STAT 02260 and 57 credits completed

This course focuses on the relevant methodologies and analytic tools that marketing researchers apply to obtain
information for decision-making. Students are expected to get hands-on experience and develop proficiency in using
primary and secondary sources of data.

END

Business Logistics

MKT 09375:

Prerequisites: MKT 09200 and Junior status orC918 Systems Engineering Concentration.

This course focuses on the logistics of physical distribution and supply chains. Topics include traffic routing, inventory
analysis and control, warehousing, location of production and storage facilities, and transportation.

END

Consumer Behavior

MKT 09376:

Prerequisites: MKT 09200 with a minimum grade of C- and Junior status

This course analyzes both the societal norms and the internal processes which impact on the consumer's purchase
decisions. How consumers process product information and make decisions is evaluated for strategic marketing
implications.

END

Product, Price, New Venture Management

MKT 09378:

Prerequisites: MKT 09200 and 57 credits completed

In this course, students analyze new product development and new product management. The course covers idea
screening, concept testing, new product evaluation, pricing theory and practice. Students study the use of marketing
techniques, including advertising, promotion and pricing for each phase of the product life cycle.

END

International Marketing

MKT 09379:

Prerequisites: MKT 09200 with a minimum grade of C- and Junior status

Basic marketing concepts as they relate to foreign markets are analyzed in depth in this course. Two approaches are used:
the environmental approach introduces the setting in which international marketing takes place; and the managerial
approach incorporates marketing strategies of firms that choose to venture abroad.

END

Sales Force Management

MKT 09382:

Prerequisites: MKT 09200 and Junior status

From the viewpoint of a district manager, this course focuses on planning, directing, and controlling the marketing plan
through a sales force. Topics include recruiting, selecting, training, motivating, and evaluating the sales force, as well as sales
forecasting and time and territory management. Additionally, this course examines the role of personal selling in the
marketing mix. Students learn theory and gain practice in prospecting, presenting, overcoming objections, closing and
follow-up.

END

Research Methods In Marketing-Wi

MKT 09384:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 & STAT 02260 & MKT 09200 with minimum grade of C- & Junior status

This course focuses on the relevant methodologies and analytic tools that marketing researchers apply to obtain
information for decision-making. Students are expected to get hands-on experience and develop proficiency in using
primary and secondary sources of data. Writing is an essential component of the course as students will learn to present the
results of their data analysis in professional and understandable written form.

END

MKT 09386:

The Marketing Plan

Prerequisites: MKT 09200 and 6 s.h. of Upper Level Marketing Courses

The course is designed to provide students with a thorough understanding of the market planning process and the creation
of the market plan. Students will be exposed to the use of market information, data analysis, and forecasting in the
development of market plans. Case analysis and project-based learning will be utilized in order to provide students with
hands-on experience.

END

Supply Chain Planning

MKT 09387:

Prerequisites: MKT 09375

The dynamic nature of consumer demand and dramatic advances in information technology make the supply chain
planning critical to competitive success. The course is designed to assist students in developing the analytical skills necessary
to manage the processes and functions existent in modern supply chains. This course focuses on several supply chain
planning areas such as demand planning, replenishment planning, to name a few, and provide hands-on learning for how best
to understand key tradeoffs and phenomena. Lectures, models, methods and computer exercises are used.

END

Advanced Marketing Research Methods

MKT 09388:

Prerequisites: MKT 09384, MIS 02234, Marketing major and Junior status

This course is a continuation of MKT 09384 Research Methods in Marketing. It extends students’ understanding of the
relevant marketing research methodologies and analytic tools through hands-on experience. Students will develop
proficiency in using primary and secondary sources of data; the students will collect primary and secondary data, use
statistical software (such as SPSS or SAS) to analyze data, and develop skills needed to present findings professionally.
Particular emphasis will be given to the use of databases and data mining as a data collection strategy and the challenges such
data collection strategies present.

END

Selected Topics In Marketing

MKT 09390:

Prerequisites: MKT 09200 and 57 credits completed

Students will investigate new areas and developments in theory, research and practice in Marketing. Specialized topics will
vary each semester. Course activities will include in-depth study of current topics and preparation of case analyses and/or
research papers. Students may consult with the department chair or the instructor for course details.

END

Business To Business Marketing

MKT 09391:

Prerequisites: MKT 09200 and Junior status

Students will investigate key concepts and strategic issues associated with marketing to business and organizational
customers. Strategic differences between business and consumer marketing will be examined. Students will apply course
concepts by means of analysis of case studies of actual decision situations.

END

Marketing Consultancy

MKT 09402:

Prerequisites: MKT 09384 and 6 semester hours of upper division marketing classes

This course provides the students with an opportunity to apply the skills and knowledge gained to solve real marketing
challenges. Students work in small teams to consult with businesses in various marketing projects. They evaluate, plan, and
design marketing plans by conducting research and analyzing data. Client-team meetings occur regularly throughout the
semester.

END

Strategic Marketing Management

MKT 09403:

Prerequisites: 9 Earned Semester Hours of Upper Division Marketing Courses and 87 total Earned Semester Hours

Students will investigate the approaches and problems of developing marketing plans and marketing decision making
under conditions of uncertainty. The course focuses on the major types of decisions facing marketing executives in their
attempts to harmonize the objectives and resources of the firm with the opportunities in the market place.

END

Strategic Supply Chain Management

MKT 09406:

Prerequisites: MKT 09375

This course is the capstone experience for students majoring in Supply Chain & Logistics. The course utilizes the SAP
software to provide students with a real-world experience in managing supply chains and developing competitive advantage
through the effective development and maintenance of logistical systems.

END

Supervised Internship In Marketing

MKT 09411:

Prerequisites: 6 earned semester hours of upper division Marketing Courses and 60 credits completed.

This course is intended to provide students with actual business experience. Fieldwork is combined with reports and
online discussion sessions in the classroom. Registration in the course and prior approval from the instructor are required.

END

MKTBIS Engagement & Career Exporation

MKT 09412:

Prerequisites: Admission to Marketing, MIS, or SupplyChain & Logistics

This is a non-credit course that all Marketing, MIS and Supply Chain & Logistics majors are enrolled in each semester. The
course is graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. Each student will be required to complete a set of extracurricular activities in
accordance with the program requirements.

END

MKT 09413:

MKTBIS Engagement & Career Exploration

Prerequisites: Admission to Marketing, MIS, or Supply Chain & Logistics

This is a non-credit course that all Marketing, MIS and Supply Chain & Logistics majors are enrolled in each semester. The
course is graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. Each student will be required to complete a set of extracurricular activities in
accordance with the program requirements.

END

Marketing Management

MKT 09500:

Prerequisites: MBA Foundation Courses

This course focuses on managing the marketing function in a dynamic, competitive environment in coordination with
other organizational functions to enhance the overall performance of an organization. Attention will be devoted to the
design of strategies for the achievement of competitive advantage in product/service offerings, pricing, promotion and
distribution. Students will build upon their existing knowledge base of marketing concepts and will develop or extend
competencies in analytical decision-making, ability to identify market opportunities, and ability to develop and evaluate
marketing plans.

END

International Marketing

MKT 09600:

Students will examine all issues facing marketing managers in the light of the unique challenges posed by the
internationalization of the economy. The cultural, economic, political, and legal environment will be examined. Market
research in world markets, the planning and development of consumer and industrial products, promotion, pricing and
distribution will also be analyzed. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Principles of Transportation

SCL 01320:

Prerequisites: MKT 09375

This course is designed to assist students in developing the analytical skills necessary to manage the processes and
functions existent in modern transportation networks. Using the Case Method and recommended textbook, students will
analyze realistic situations and problems confronting transportation managers. Consequently, they will identify solutions
and develop implementation plans for their recommended solutions. Cases for analysis and discussion will include topics
such as transportation planning, traffic management, rail and air operations, and maritime operations.

END

Warehousing

SCL 01330:

Corequisites: MKT 09375

This course will familiarize students with the concept of warehousing and how warehousing can contribute in enhancing
the performance of a supply chain. Specifically, the course will focus on topics like warehouse operations, warehouse
management systems, material handling equipment, warehouse layout, and warehouse performance measurement.

END

Procurement

SCL 01350:

Prerequisites: MKT 09375 and Junior status

This course provides an in-depth analysis of the procurement process and supplier management, with strong emphasis
placed on managing a supplier base for both products and services. Elements examined include the strategic role of
procurement in supply chains, the identification and evaluation of requirements, the strategic make-versus-buy decision,
how to identify, evaluate, and select potential suppliers and conduct a post-purchase evaluation; and the impact of
information technology on strategic procurement. Both theoretical and quantitative perspectives will be offered. In
addition, the topics will be addressed from strategic, financial, and global perspectives.

END

Lean Six Sigma for Supply Chain Management

SCL 01360:

Prerequisites: MKT 09375 Corequisites: MGT 06305

This course discusses how to analyze and improve processes in order to produce and deliver goods and services satisfying
customer needs. Topics include performance measures, process design, process evaluation, and techniques of improving and
controlling supply chain processes. The course introduces the concepts of Lean, Six Sigma, and Continuous Improvement.

END

Global Supply Chain

SCL 01380:

Prerequisites: MKT 09375

The course is designed to assist students in developing the analytical skills necessary to manage the processes and functions
existent in modern global supply chains. Using the case method and recommended textbook, students will analyze realistic
situations and problems confronting supply chain managers in a global setting. They will also identify solutions and develop
implementation plans for their recommended solutions. Within this process, students will develop an acceptance,
understanding, and appreciation of the economic, political, and cultural differences that make up a global market. Cases for
analysis and discussion will include topics such as supply chain strategy, operations management, inventory management,
lean systems and six sigma quality issues, and sustainability supply chain management.

END

Supply Chain Analytics

SCL 01382:

Prerequisites: MKT 09375 & Stat 02260

This course focuses on several key supply chain functions and provide hands-on learning for how to best understand and
analyze data that may be available for the supply chain. The design aspect of a supply chain is emphasized. Modeling and
deriving insights are facilitated through the extensive use of excel-based approach.

END

Selected Topics in Supply Chain Management

SCL 01390:

Prerequisites: MKT 09375 and Junior status

Students will investigate new areas and developments in theory, research and practice in Supply Chain Management.
Specialized topics will vary each semester. Course activities will include indepth study of current topics, preparation of case
analyses, research papers, and/or projects. Students may consult with the department chair or the instructor for course
details.

END

Supervised Internship in Supply Chain and Logistics

SCL 01410:

Prerequisites: MKT 09375 and 58 credits completed

The course is designed to assist students in developing the skills necessary to target diverse industries that align with the
student’s skills, interests, and goals. The internship will help supply chain students evaluate the nature, culture, work
environment, and career advancement opportunities within an organization. The internship will also help students develop
and refine oral and written communication skills and identify areas for future knowledge and skill development.

END

Mathematics Learning Community

MATH 01000:

Prerequisites: Declared mathematics major

This course is a component of the mathematics department’s learning community. Registration in this course provides a
mechanism for learning community students to engage in various Learning Community activities.

END

Foundations of Mathematical Reasoning

MATH 01090:

Foundations of Mathematical Reasoning is a semester-long quantitative literacy-based course designed to provide students
with the skills and conceptual understanding to succeed in a college-level statistics or quantitative literacy course. The 3
credits for this course do not count toward graduation requirements.

END

Topics from Fractal Geometry and Graph Theory

MATH 01103:

Prerequisites: Current Enrollment in the Cooperman Scholars Summer Program

Topics from Fractal Geometry and Graph Theory is a three-week course designed for the students in the Cooperman
Scholars Summer Program. The first half of the course covers topics from fractal geometry such as self-similarity, the Koch
Snowflake, the Sierpinski Gasket, the Menger Sponge, and the Mandelbrot Set. After introducing basic definitions, the
second half of the course covers topics from graph theory such as Euler paths and circuits, the Euler theorems, Hamiltonian
paths and circuits, complete graphs, the Traveling Salesman strategies, the Game of Sprouts, and the Knight’s Tour.

END

Contemporary Mathematics

MATH 01115:

Prerequisites: Old SAT score of 400+ or New SAT Score of 440+ or ACT score of 17+ or Elementary Algebra score of 62+ or QAS score
of 249+ or "S" in MATH 01090

This course is designed to develop an appreciation of what mathematics is and how it is used today. Topics covered
include: statistics and probability; graphs, trees and algorithms; geometrical perspectives including transformations,
symmetry, and similarity; and the mathematics of social choice. Students are expected to have completed equivalents Basic
Skills Reading and either Basic Algebra 1 or Foundations of Mathematical Reasoning.

END

Quantitative Reasoning

MATH 01118:

Quantitative Reasoning serves students who are focused on developing quantitative literacy skills that will be meaningful
for their professional, civic, and personal lives. Such reasoning is a habit of mind, seeking pattern and order when faced with
unfamiliar contexts. In this course, an emphasis is placed on the need for data to make good decisions and an understanding
of the dangers inherent in basing decisions on anecdotal evidence rather than data.

END

Precalculus Mathematics

MATH 01122:

Prerequisites: Old SAT score of 550+ or New SAT score of 570+ or ACT score of 24+ or Elem Algebra score of 77+ or AAF score of 263+
or "S" in MATH 01095

This course helps prepare students for Calculus I or Calculus T&A. The contents include: a brief review of intermediate
algebra, the structure of the real number system, elementary analytic geometry, and algebraic, exponential, logarithmic and
trigonometric functions (including their inverses and related functions). Graphs of functions and conic sections also are
studied. A graphing calculator is required. Students are expected to have completed an equivalent of Basic Algebra II.

END

College Algebra

MATH 01123:

This course is designed to help students who are weak in algebra prepare for Statistics I or Calculus Techniques &
Applications. The contents include: a brief review of intermediate algebra, the structure of the real number system,
elementary analytic geometry, and algebraic, exponential and logarithmic functions (including their inverses and related
functions). Graphs of functions are also studied. A graphing calculator is required. Students are expected to have completed
Foundations of Mathematics Reasoning or its equivalent.

END

Reasoning with Functions

MATH 01124:

Prerequisites: Old SAT score of 400+ or NEW SAT score of 440+ or ACT score of 17+ or Elem Algebra score of 62+ or QAS score of
249+ or "S" in MATH 01090

This college level course is designed to prepare students to enter Calculus T&A (or Precalculus) and succeed in coursework
that requires a thorough knowledge of functions and algebraic reasoning. It provides students a strong foundation in
functions and their behavior by using multiple representations and explicit covariational reasoning to investigate and
explore quantities, their relationships, and how these relationships change. Additionally, this course provides students with
the algebraic tools necessary to analyze a variety of function types.

END

Trigonometry

MATH 01125:

Prerequisites: MATH 01124 with minimum grade C-

This course helps prepare students for Calculus I . The contents include trigonometric functions, inverse trigonometric
functions, the unit circle, and trigonometric identities. Graphs of trigonometric functions also are studied. A graphing
calculator is required. Students are expected to have completed an equivalent of Reasoning with Functions.

END

Calculus I

MATH 01130:

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01122 or (MATH 01124 and MATH 01125) or (MATH 03125 and MATH 01125)or CLM score
of 60+ or AAF score of 276+ or Old SAT score of 600+ or New SAT score of 620+ or ACT 27+

Calculus is a subject about functions. This course deals primarily with the two most fundamental concepts in Calculus:
derivatives and definite integrals. It begins with a discussion of notions of the limit and continuity of a function. Then the
definition of a derivative is introduced, and techniques of computing derivatives are studied. Through applications to
analysis of functions, optimizations and problems in sciences, a student can appreciate the importance of the derivative. The
concept of a definite integral as a limit of approximating sums emerges naturally in the context of problems of areas. Hidden
links between the two concepts are formulated in the Fundamental Theorems of Calculus, which also provide a convenient
shortcut for computing definite integrals. A graphing calculator is required for this course, and so is the use of computer
software, such as Mathematica.

END

Calculus II

MATH 01131:

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01130

This course begins with applications of integration (such as volume of a solid of revolution work, arc length, area of a
surface of revolution, center of mass) and derivatives of inverse trigonometric functions. Integration by parts, partial
fractions and other more advanced integration techniques are introduced, along with a discussion of numerical integration,
improper integrals, indeterminate form, sequences and infinite series. A graphing calculator is required for this course, and
so is the use of computer software, such as Mathematica.

END

Structures of Mathematics I

MATH 01201:

This course is designed primarily for elementary education majors. The course concerns the development of number
systems and algebraic structures, including the natural numbers, the integers, rational numbers, and real and complex
numbers. Concrete examples of selected algebraic structures are included. Students will be required to reason
mathematically, solve problems, and communicate mathematics effectively at different levels of formality, using a variety of
representations of mathematical concepts and procedures. Use of calculators is required.

END

Introduction to Geometry

MATH 01202:

Prerequisites: Old SAT score of 550+ or New SAT score of 570+ or ACT score of 24+ or Elem Algebra score of 77+ or AAF score of 263+
or "S" in MATH 01095

This course develops the fundamental concepts of Euclidean geometry from a modern point of view. Its topics include
sets, points, lines, space, betweenness, incidence, congruence, parallelism, similarity, transformations, volumes, and areas.
Non-Euclidean geometries are introduced. Not open to mathematics majors. Use of calculators is required. Students are
expected to have completed an equivalent of Basic Algebra II.

END

Mathematics Learning Assistant Course

MATH 01203:

Prerequisites: Permission of the learning assistant coordinator AND the recommendation of at least one other professor.

This course is designed to introduce students to the theory and practice of a learning assistant for the Math Department
and support them in their first semester as one. Students will be assigned to another mathematics course as a learning
assistant and will assist the instructor of that course by helping them to facilitate learning in the classroom. After completing
this course, a student may be selected to continue to act as a learning assistant for the Math Department.

END

Structures of Mathematics II

MATH 01204:

Prerequisites: MATH 01201

This course is designed primarily for elementary education majors. The course will require students to investigate problems
in order to deepen their conceptual and procedural understanding in the areas of algebra, data analysis, probability,
geometry, measurement, systematic listing and counting.

END

Technological Tools for Discovering Mathematics

MATH 01205:

Prerequisites: C- or better in each of CS 01104 and MATH 01131 and MATH 03150

This course will use mathematics-specific technologies to help students discover mathematics and to develop a better
understanding of new content. Throughout the course students will become aware of the broad range of
mathematics-specific technologies available to mathematicians, become proficient in the use of these, and pursue the
advantages, disadvantages, and limitations of such technologies. Students will solve problems and advance their
understanding of topics in the areas of pre-calculus, calculus, geometry and statistics.

END

MATH 01210:

Linear Algebra

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01131

This course includes: linear equations and matrices, vector spaces, linear dependence and independence, dimension and
basis of a vector space, linear transformations, inner product and cross product, orthogonality, eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
Use of graphing calculators is required and computers may be used at the option of the instructor. It is recommended that
MATH 03150 or MATH 03160 should be taken prior to this course.

END

Calculus III

MATH 01230:

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01131

This course includes: vectors, vector functions, velocity, acceleration, partial differentiation, directional derivatives,
multiple integration, and vector calculus. The student is expected to use computer software, such as Mathematica, in
addition to the graphing calculator.

END

Ordinary Differential Equations

MATH 01231:

Prerequisites: C- or better in both MATH 01210 and MATH 01230

Applications of ordinary differential equations and their methods of solution form the major part of this course. It also
includes the solution of nth order equations, particularly of first and higher degree linear differential equations, and series
and Laplace Transform solutions. Students might be asked to use computers and/or graphics calculators as an aid in solving
equations.

END

Mathematical Modeling for Educators

MATH 01232:

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01210 AND MATH 01230

This course provides an introduction to mathematical modeling, including probability models, theoretical and empirical
modeling, and modeling with simple differential equations. Students will frequently use technology in solving problems, and
all students will complete a group modeling project.

END

Mathematics for Engineering Analysis

MATH 01235:

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01230

This course provides a comprehensive introduction to Linear Algebra and Ordinary Differential Equations. Topics in
Linear Algebra include solutions to linear systems of equations, matrices, determinants, vector spaces, eigenvalues,
eigenvectors, symmetric matrices and orthogonality. The ODE part consists of separable equations, exact equations, linear
differential equations of first, second and higher orders, systems of linear differential equations, numerical methods, and
applications.

END

Mathematical Proof Writing

MATH 01300:

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 03150 Discrete Mathematics and MATH 01130 Calculus I

This course is designed to teach students to meticulously craft logically sound mathematical arguments about a wide
variety of basic mathematical concepts. These topics include sets, relations, functions, recurrence relations, graphs, and
limits. In addition to direct proofs, students also learn to write proofs by contraposition, contradiction, and mathematical
induction. Specifically, it is meant to prepare students for the rigorous reasoning required in higher level mathematics
courses such as MATH 01340 Modern Algebra I and MATH 01330 Introduction to Real Analysis I.

END

College Geometry

MATH 01310:

Prerequisites: C- or better in each of PHIL 09130 and MATH 01210 and MATH 01230 and MATH 03150

This geometry course will use both synthetic and analytic approaches to study advanced concepts in Euclidean geometry,
to introduce non-Euclidean geometry, to explore the basics of Transformational geometry and Higher Dimensional
geometry, and to trace the historical development of geometry. Computer use will be emphasized throughout the course.

END

Introduction to Real Analysis I

MATH 01330:

Prerequisites: C- or better in both MATH 01230 and MATH 03150

This course prepares students for more advanced courses in analysis as well as introducing rigorous mathematical thought
processes. Topics included are sets, functions, the real number system, sequences, limits, continuity and derivatives.

END

Introduction to Real Analysis II

MATH 01331:

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01330

This course is a continuation of Introduction to Real Analysis I. The purpose is to extend student's understanding of basic
analysis and the calculus. Topics included are: the mean-value theorem, existence of the Riemann integral,
Riemann-Stieltjes integration, infinite series, convergence tests and Fourier series.

END

Numerical Analysis

MATH 01332:

Prerequisites: C- or better in each of (CS 01104 or CS 04103 or CS 04113) and MATH 01131 and (MATH 01210 or MATH 01235)

This course includes: elements of error analysis, real roots of an equation, polynomial approximation by finite difference
and least square methods, interpolation, quadrature, numerical solution of ordinary differential equations, and numerical
solutions of systems of linear equations. The student should expect to program a computer in addition to using a graphing
calculator.

END

Modern Algebra I

MATH 01340:

Prerequisites: C- or better in each of MATH 03150 and MATH 01210 and PHIL 09130

This course includes: the natural numbers, integers, rationals, and reals as mathematical systems, and the introductory
theory of groups, rings, integral domains, and fields. Also included are homomorphisms and isomorphisms, subgroups,
kernels, rings and ideals and polynomial rings. At the option of the instructor, computer use can be required.

END

Modern Algebra II

MATH 01341:

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01340

This course extends the study begun in Modern Algebra I to a more detailed investigation of abstract algebraic structures.
Included are Sylow theorems, rings and ideals, polynomial rings, ring and field extension and Galois theory.

END

Theory of Numbers

MATH 01352:

Prerequisites: C- or better in both MATH 01210 and MATH 03150, or C- or better in both MATH 01210 and MATH 03160

This course includes divisibility properties of integers, theory of congruence, Diophantine Analysis, congruences of higher
degree, quadratic residues and famous problems of number theory.

END

Introduction to Topology

MATH 01354:

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01330

This course covers the properties of general topological spaces, separation, compactness, connectedness and the
Heine-Borel and Bolzano-Weierstrass theorems.

END

Introduction to Real and Complex Variables

MATH 01361:

Prerequisites: C- or better in both Math 01230 and MATH 01210

The course introduces the basic ideals of real analysis: sequences, continuity, differentiability and their rigorous treatment,
and introduces the basic elements of complex analysis up to derivatives rules.

END

Introduction to Partial Differential Equations

MATH 01386:

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01231 and MATH 01210) or MATH 01235

This course is a study of partial differential equations and their applications. Topics include the derivation of the wave
equation, Laplace's equation and the heat equation, Fourier series and integrals, boundary value problems, Bessel functions
and Legendre Polynomials.

END

Mathematics Research

MATH 01390:

Prerequisites: MATH 01210 and MATH 03150 and MATH 01230 and permission of instructor

This course focuses on developing students' skills in conducting mathematical research at the undergraduate level.
Moreover, students will develop skills in writing mathematics at a rigorous and professional level and to disseminate their
work through seminar and conference presentations.

END

MATH 01395:

This course allows faculty the ability to offer courses in mathematical topics not taught on a regular basis.

Selected Topics in Mathematics

END

History of Mathematics

MATH 01410:

Prerequisites: C- or better in two 300-level (or higher) Math major courses

This course includes a survey of the development of mathematical ideas from early times up to present day college
mathematics. Emphasis is on historical mathematical problems and their solution. Readings and reports on selected topics
are required.

END

Mathematics Field Experience

MATH 01421:

Prerequisites: MATH 01131 and STAT 02360 and permission of instructor

Students accept assigned projects in a professional environment. These projects normally involve applied mathematics or
statistics. Students are expected to work at least 150 hours during the semester for which they receive credit. Written
reports are required.

END

Introduction to Complex Analysis

MATH 01430:

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01330

This course includes properties of complex numbers and their conjugates, functions of a complex variable, limits,
continuity and derivatives for complex functions. Also included are: Integration and the Cauchy integral theorems, uniform
convergence, Taylor's and Laurent's series and conformal mapping.

END

Mathematics Seminar for Educators - WI

MATH 01497:

Prerequisites: Senior Standing and C- or better in MATH 01340 and MATH 01232 and MATH 01361 and MATH 01310

This course for future mathematics teachers is designed to integrate students’ knowledge of mathematics and to further
developing their problem-solving abilities. The course content includes problem-solving techniques, a review of the
literature of mathematics, solving problems drawn from a variety of current resources, a review of the content of high school
mathematics from an advanced standpoint, and study of techniques of proof and issues in the philosophy of mathematics
and its foundations. Additionally, each student is required to write and to present orally a research report on a mathematical
topic.

END

Math Seminar (WI)

MATH 01498:

Prerequisites: Senior standing and C- or better in STAT 02320 and MATH 01340 and MATH 01231 and MATH 01330or (STAT
02360 and STAT 02361)

This course is designed to integrate students' knowledge of mathematics and to further develop their problem solving
abilities. The course content includes problem-solving techniques, a review of the literature of mathematics, solving
problems drawn from a variety of current resources, and study of techniques of proof and issues in the philosophy of
mathematics and its foundation. Additionally, each student is required to write and to present orally, a research report on a
mathematical topic.

END

MATH 01502:

This course includes linear systems, linear dependence and independence, linear transformation theory, multilinear forms,
matrices, determinants, inner product spaces.

Linear Algebra and Matrix Theory

END

Probability and Mathematical Statistics I

MATH 01505:

This course is an introduction to the theory and application of probability and mathematical statistics. After a brief
introduction to the concepts of descriptive and inferential statistics, the emphasis is on probability theory and its
applications. Topics covered include introduction to probability theory, transformations and expectations, common
families of discrete and continuous distributions, multivariate distributions and properties of a random sample.

END

Calculus: Techniques and Applications

MATH 03125:

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01122 or MATH 01123 or MATH 01124 or CLM score of 60+ or AAF score of 276+ or Old SAT
score of 600+ or New SAT score of 620+ or ACT 27+

This course introduces students to the fundamental concepts and techniques of differential and integral calculus. Emphasis
is placed on practical and informative applications of limits, derivatives and integrals in today’s world, with those in business
highlighted. A graphics calculator is required. Students are expected to have completed an equivalent of the course of
College Algebra.

END

Discrete Mathematics

MATH 03150:

Prerequisites: Old SAT score of 550+ or New SAT score of 570+ or ACT score of 24+ or Elem Algebra score of 77+ or QAS score of 255+
or "S" in MATH 01095

This course provides a survey of discrete mathematics topics appropriate as an introduction for students of mathematics
and computer science. Topics included are logic, sets, relations, functions, recursion, combinatorics, graphs, and modular
arithmetic. Emphasis is place on exploration and computation in these areas.

END

Discrete Structures

MATH 03160:

Prerequisites: Old SAT score of 550+ or New SAT score of 570+ or ACT score of 24+ or Elem Algebra score of 77+ or QAS score of 255+
or "S" in MATH 01095

This course covers mathematical topics essential for work in computer science. This material includes number bases,
mathematical induction, sets, relations, functions, congruence, recursion, combinatorics, graphs, trees, logic, Boolean
algebras, and proof techniques. While this is a course in mathematics, many of the examples and applications will be taken
from computer science. The instructor may require use of a graphing calculator and/or computer. This course covers much
of the same material as Discrete Mathematics (MATH03.150), but with a computer science focus. In no case will a student
be allowed to receive credit for both courses. Both courses will be treated as equivalent for the purposes of satisfying
pre-reqs and course requirements.

END

Patterns in Nature I: Visual Geometry

MATH 03305:

Prerequisites: C- or better in each of BIOL 01105, CS 01102, CS 01200, STAT 02260, (PHYS 02150 or PHYS 00150) and CHEM
05102

This course for students in the natural/science track of the Liberal Studies major illustrates the connections between
geometry and the natural sciences, using computers, manipulatives, and hands-on models. Concepts covered include
properties of two- and three-dimensional shapes, transformations, dimension, and non-Euclidean geometries.

END

Patterns in Nature II: Projects in Calculus

MATH 03315:

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 03305

This project-oriented course for students in the Liberal Studies Math/Science program provides an introduction to the
mathematics of change. Topical coverage includes a review of functions, limits, continuity, the notion of the derivative and
its applications, and the notion of integration and its applications. The use of numerical methods will be included in the
context of mathematical modeling and various types of technologies, including graphing calculators, spreadsheets, and
mathematical software packages will be utilized.

END

Applications of Mathematics

MATH 03400:

Prerequisites: C- or better in each of MATH 01210, MATH 01230, and MATH 01231

This course may include examples of mathematical models applied to the various fields of the biological, physical and social
sciences. The process of building a mathematical model to describe a real world system will be demonstrated. Emphasis will
be placed on the value of mathematical models for solving problems and obtaining new results. Computers and graphing
calculators will be used.

END

Deterministic Models in Operations Research

MATH 03411:

Prerequisites: C- or better in (MATH 01230 or MATH 01141) and C- or better in (MATH 01210 or MATH 01235)

This course is an introduction to mathematical modeling, analysis, and solution procedures applicable to decision-making
problems in deterministic environment. Methodologies covered include the simplex and interior point methods of solving
linear programming models, inventory theory, assignment and transportation problems, dynamic programming and
sensitivity analysis. Solutions will be obtained using theoretical methods and software packages.

END

Stochastic Models in Operations Research

MATH 03412:

Prerequisites: C- or better in each of STAT 02360 and MATH 03411, or C- or better in each of STAT 02360 and (MATH 01230 or
MATH 01141) and (MATH 01210 or MATH 01235)

This course is an introduction to mathematical modeling, analysis, and solution procedures applicable to decision-making
problems in an uncertain (stochastic) environment. Methodologies covered include dynamic programming, Markov chains,
queuing theory, decision trees, system reliability and inventory theory. Solutions will be obtained using theoretical methods
and software packages.

END

Mathematical Modeling for Biological Systems

MATH 03501:

Prerequisites: MATH 01210 or MATH 01231 or permission of instructor

This course introduces students to modeling biological systems using ordinary differential equations. It focuses on the
modeling process including the construction, analysis, and interpretation of mathematical models. It introduces new
techniques for studying the solutions to these mathematical models and develops precedures for making the models more
realistic.

END

Partial Differential Equations in Biomathematics

MATH 03525:

Prerequisites: MATH 01231 or permission of instructor.

This course covers topics in partial differential equations as it applies to biomathematics. These include second order
linear and nonlinear partial differential equations, diffusion and conservation laws, waves and pattern formation,
Chemotaxis and other forms of cell and organism movement. Computer software, such as Mathematica, will be used.

END

Applied Statistical Epidemiology

MATH 03610:

Prerequisites: MATH 01505, MATH 01502 AND CS 01104 or equivalent or Permission of Instructor

This course introduces the basic concepts of epidemiology and focuses on analyzing epidemiological data using a statistical
programming language such as R, one of the most efficient programming languages for statistical computing and graphics.
This course will lay the ground work to successfully design, conduct, analyze and interpret findings from epidemiological
studies using the appropriate statistical methods.

END

Special Topics in Biomathematics

MATH 03611:

This course covers in depth a wide-range of advanced topics in biomathematics inspired by applications of mathematics in
biology and health sciences problems. The course will offer students the opportunity to learn modern emerging cutting-edge
research approaches not covered by other courses.

END

Mathematical Modeling in Neuroscience

NEUR 01450:

Prerequisites: MATH 01131 and NEUR 01301

Mathematical Modeling in Neuroscience introduces mathematical and computational tools that students will use to build
models to simulate and analyze brain functions. Several types of models will be discussed, such as the Hodgkin-Huxley
model for a single-cell system to more complicated neural encoding and decoding culminating with modern neural networks.
Students will also learn about mathematical tools relevant to understanding these models, such as linear algebra, differential
equations, and probability.

END

Elementary Statistics

STAT 02100:

This course gives a basic introduction to the fundamental concepts and methods of statistics. Its topics include: basic
measures of central tendency and variability, graphical displays, elementary design of experiments, descriptive simple linear
regression, elementary probability, the normal and t-distributions, confidence intervals and hypothesis testing. Use of a
statistical calculator, graphing calculator or software package is required. Note: many majors require a different introductory
statistics course; students should check their major requirements before signing up for this course.

END

Statistical Literacy

STAT 02102:

This course aims to introduce non-STEM majors to the critical thinking skills they need to understand statistical topics
that they may encounter in the popular media or their future careers. Students will learn to critically evaluate the statistical
information they encounter during everyday life, with a focus on becoming intelligent consumers, rather than producers, of
data. Emphasis will be placed on discussing and analyzing case studies drawn from a variety of professional disciplines as well
as the popular press. Note: many majors require a different introductory statistics course; students should check their major
requirements before signing up for this course.

END

Statistics I

STAT 02260:

Students learn to use various graphical displays and measures of location and variability to describe data. The course
considers elementary probability and sampling distributions, and uses the normal and t-distributions in estimation and
hypotheses testing. It includes descriptive techniques for simple linear regression and correlation. Use of a graphing
calculator is required; computer software may be used. Students are expected to have completed an equivalent of College
Algebra.

END

Statistics II

STAT 02261:

Prerequisites: C- or better in STAT 02260

This course is a continuation of Statistics I. Confidence intervals and hypothesis tests are studied in more detail, beginning
with two sample inference for means and proportions. The inferences in simple linear regression and multiple regression are
presented. Analysis of variance and experimental design are introduced. Other topics include chi-square tests for
goodness-of-fit and independence, and the principles of nonparametric tests. Use of statistical software such as Minitab,
SPSS or JMP, is also required.

END

Basics of Statistical Computing

STAT 02265:

Prerequisites: STAT 02260 with grade C- or better OR STAT 02320 with grade C- or better OR STAT 02284 with grade C- or
better OR STAT 02280 with grade C- or better

This is an introductory course in programming-based statistical software packages. Students will learn the core of ideas of
programming such as objects, data structures, looping, and functions. Students will also learn how to read data from
different types of files, format them appropriately and use them to perform basic statistical analyses, such as graphing and
computing numerical summaries, or more advanced statistical analyses, such as one sample or two T-test, z-test for
proportions, correlation analysis, and multiple linear regression.

END

Biometry

STAT 02280:

Prerequisites: MATH 01130 and (BIOL 01106 or BIOL 01202 or MCB 01101)

This laboratory course considers elementary data analysis, probability and sampling distributions. It uses the normal and
t-distributions to introduce estimation and hypotheses testing. It includes descriptive techniques and inference for simple
linear regression and correlation. Analyses of variance, nonparametric tests and chi-square tests are covered in this course.
Emphasis is placed on experimentation and the application of statistical methods to the biological sciences. Computer
software is used regularly in data manipulation, statistical analyses, and formal presentation of results.

END

Statistics for the Biomedical Sciences

STAT 02284:

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01140 or MATH 01131

This course introduces statistical concepts and analytical methods as applied to data encountered in the biomedical
sciences and engineering. It emphasizes the basic concepts of experimental design, quantitative analysis of data, and
statistical inference. Topics include probability theory and distributions; population parameters and their sample estimates;
descriptive statistics for central tendency and dispersion; hypothesis testing and confidence intervals for means and
proportions; categorical data analysis including relative risk, odds ratios, and the chi-square statistic; correlation and simple
linear regression.

END

Probability and Statistics for Electrical & Computer Engineering

STAT 02286:

Corequisites: ENGR 01303 (may be taken concurrently)

This is a Junior level course covering concepts in probability and statistics useful to those studying electrical and computer
engineering. Assuming knowledge of descriptive statistics and basic probability from earlier courses, topics will include
more advanced probability, continuous and discrete random variables, sampling distributions, interval estimation, and
hypothesis testing for one and two parameters. Also explored will be topics in linear regression, analysis of variance,
chi-square tests, and an introduction to distribution free tests. Emphasis will be placed on problems with applications to
engineering. While this course is directed at students pursuing a major in Electrical and Computer Engineering, it is open to

END

Probability and Statistical Inference for Computing Systems

STAT 02290:

Prerequisites: C- or better in each of (MATH 03150 or MATH 03160) and MATH 01131 and (CS 04113 or CS 01104 or CS 04103)

This laboratory course considers descriptive techniques for presenting and summarizing data, techniques in probability,
discrete and continuous random variables, estimation and hypothesis testing. Emphasis is placed on concepts and
simulation, regularly using computer software for data manipulation and presentation, function manipulation and
presentation, simulation, and statistical analyses. Examples will be drawn from the field of Computer Science.

END

Introduction to Statistical Computing

STAT 02311:

Prerequisites: Minimum Grade of C- in the following: STAT 02260 or STAT 02320 or STAT 02284 or STAT 02280 or STAT
02290

This is an introductory course in programming-based statistical software packages, such as SAS, R, and Matlab, intended
for students with statistics background. Students will learn the core of ideas of programming such as objects, data structures,
looping, and functions. Students will also learn how to read data from different types of files, format them appropriately and
use them to perform basic statistical analyses, such as graphing and computing numerical summaries, or more advanced
statistical analyses, such as one and two sample T-tests, Chi-square for comparisons of proportions, regression,
non-parametric analyses, bootstrapping, and simulations.

END

Concepts in Statistical Data Analysis

STAT 02320:

Prerequisites: C- or better in each of MATH 01131 and MATH 01210 and (CS 01104 or CS 04103 or CS 04113)

This course examines the concepts behind statistical thinking in data analysis. Using rudimentary programming,
simulation, and mathematical techniques, students will see what is behind the meaning of statistical significance (and the
P-value), as well as the conclusions that can justifiably be made from a study. They will use a statistically software package, be
introduced to the modern techniques of randomization of bootstrapping, and learn some classical statistical techniques as
well. This course is required for all mathematics BA and BS majors

END

Special Topics in Statistics

STAT 02323:

Prerequisites: Minimum Grade of C- in the following: STAT 02260 or STAT 02320 or STAT 02284 or STAT 02280

This course will provide students with the opportunity to study a topic in statistics that is not a part of the existing
curriculum, such as biostatistics, non-parametric methods, Bayesian analysis, etc. Course title and content will vary. May be
repeated for credit.

END

Applied Statistical Analysis in Healthcare Professions

STAT 02331:

Prerequisites: Athletic Training, Exercise Science, or Nutrition program, STAT 02260 and a grade of C- or better

This undergraduate course examines statistical design and methods necessary to develop proper experiments and analyze
data related to athletic training and other healthcare professions, as well as recognizing the strengths and limitations of
studies in the literature. Students will learn 1) how to design an experiment, including the use of power analysis; 2) how to
assess the validity of the underlying assumptions of statistical methods, in order to determine which statistical method
should be used to analyze data; 3) use statistical software to analyze data; and 4) perform assessments of existing studies.
General scenarios to be examined will include 1) two independent samples, 2) three or more independent samples, and 3)
dependent samples. Linear and multiple regression models will also be covered.

END

Elements of Statistical Learning

STAT 02340:

Prerequisites: (STAT 02320 or STAT 02360) and MATH 01210 and (CS 01104 or CS 04103 or CS 04113)

This course will provide students an accessible overview of the field of statistical learning, an essential toolset for making
sense of the vast and complex data sets that have emerged in fields ranging from biology to finance to marketing to
astrophysics. This course presents some of the most important modeling and prediction techniques, along with relevant
applications. Topics include linear regression, classification, resampling methods, shrinkage approaches, tree-based
methods, support vector machines, clustering and more. Students will receive clear and intuitive guidance regarding how to
implement cutting-edge statistical and machine-learning methods to real-world examples. The goal of this course is to teach
students the use of statistical learning techniques used by practitioners in science, industry, and other fields.

END

Regression Analysis

STAT 02350:

Prerequisites: C- or better in (MATH 01210 and STAT 02260) or STAT 02320 or STAT 02284 or STAT 02280

This course will provide a comprehensive introduction to simple and multiple linear regression. Students will learn the
principles of least squares estimation, model diagnostics and remedies, through simple linear regression. Students will
extend what they learned to the techniques of multiple regression, including models for numerical predictors, and numerical
and categorical predictors; analyses, model diagnostics, multicollinearity, and transformations of variables; and model
selection techniques. Students will be exposed to the matrix foundations of regression and introduced to nonlinear
regression, such as logistic and Poisson regression. Concepts taught in this course will be enhanced through the use of
appropriate statistical software.

END

Probability and Random Variables

STAT 02360:

Prerequisites: C- or better in both of MATH 03150 and (MATH 01230 or MATH 01141)

This course is an introduction to the theory and application of probability and random variables, with a short introduction
to mathematical statistics, as the post-calculus level. Topics covered include sample spaces, random variables, discrete and
continuous probability distributions, mathematical expectation, and multivariate distributions. At the end of the course the
concept of estimation, from mathematical statistics, will be introduced. A few of the concepts of descriptive statistics will
be introduced as needed. Use of a graphing calculator is required.

END

Mathematical Statistics

STAT 02361:

Prerequisites: C- or better in STAT 02360

A continuation of STAT 02.360, the course emphasizes the theory of inferential statistics and its applications. The Central
Limit Theorem is more fully developed as are the concepts of estimation and hypothesis testing. The properties of
estimators are covered and tests using normal, t, chi-square, and F distributions are studied. Nonparametric methods,
regression, and correlation are also covered. Use of a graphing calculator is required.

END

Design of Experiments: Analysis of Variance

STAT 02371:

Prerequisites: (MATH 01210 and MATH 01235) and (STAT 02260 or STAT 02280 or STAT 02284 or STAT 02286 or STAT
02290 or STAT 02320 or STAT 02361)

Students will gain an understanding of the major theoretical and practical concepts in the design of experiments using the
statistical technique called the analysis of variance (ANOVA). A brief discussion of the concept of power, and the minimum
number of experimental trials to achieve that power, will be used as this motivation for careful design. Students will be
introduced to several aspects of the design of experiments beyond one- and two-way ANOVA, such as blocking, factorial
designs, fractional designs, and random factors.

END

Advanced Data Analysis (Multivariate and Bayesian)

STAT 02450:

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01210 and (STAT 02320 or STAT 02284 or STAT 02286 or STAT 02290)

Introduction to Bayesian methodology and Bayesian methods in data science, multivariate data, multivariate normal
distribution, multivariate regression, principal component and factor analysis, canonical correlation, discriminant analyses,
and clustering. There will be extensive use of appropriate statistical and programming software.

END

Introduction to Statistical Data Analysis

STAT 02510:

Prerequisites: Probability & Random Variables (STAT 02.360) or equivalent, and Linear Algebra (MATH 01.210) or equivalent.

This course examines the principles behind statistical data analysis, and introduces students to major areas of statistical
data analysis needed by a practicing biomathematician. Using simulation, students will use bootstrapping to develop the
mechanics of confidence intervals, use randomization to develop the mechanics of hypthesis tests, and learn the types of
conclusions that can justifiably be made from a study. They will also be introduced to models of analyzing data that is
categorical, numerical, and a combination of both, through the study of contingency tables, linear regression, and the
analysis of variance. They will use at lease one statistical software package.

END

Applied Stochastic Processes

STAT 02513:

Prerequisites: STAT 02360 and MATH 01210 or ECE 09433 or permission of instructor.

This course introduces the concept of a sequence of random events known as a stochastic process, as well as the
mathematical methods used to model variety of types of stochastic processes and analyze their short and long-term
behavior. A broad spectrum of examples from bilogy, health, and medicine will be included throughout the course. Topics
include the basic classifications of stochastic processes, Markov chains, Poisson processes, continuous-time Markov chains,
renewal processes, and branching processes. Statistical and computer algebra system software will be used when relevant.

END

Applied Multivariate Data Analysis

STAT 02515:

Prerequisites: Graduate standing in M.S. in Data Analytics or (MATH 01131 and MATH 01210) and (STAT 02360 and STAT
02260 or STAT 02290) or permission of the instructor.

This course examines the principles behind statistical data analysis for multivariate data, and introduces the students to
major areas of multivariate I data analysis. Topics include multiple and logistic regression, principal component analysis,
factor analysis, cluster analysis, MANOVA, multidimensional scaling, discriminant analysis and canonical correlation. The
students will use at least one statistical software package.

END

Design and Analysis of Experiments

STAT 02525:

Prerequisites: Graduate standing and an introductory statistics course at at-least the 200 level, or permission of the instructor.

This is a graduate level course that investigates fundamental topics in experimentation as well as design methods. The
course also introduces the analysis associated with various experiments. Examples and case studies based on real-world
events will be used to illustrate course concepts. Students will be required to complete and end-to-end project that will
include an experiment's design, data collection and analysis.

END

Introduction To Mechanical Design

ME 10101:

This course introduces the student to mechanical design process, synthesis techniques, and modern analysis tools. It
focuses on synthesis of linkage and cam mechanisms. Laboratory experience will include computer simulation and analysis.
Design experience will be integrated throughout the course and culminate in a design project.

END

Manufacturing & Measurement Techniques

ME 10210:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00220

This course focuses on the use of standard machine tools and rapid prototyping technologies in the manufacturing process.
Measurement techniques for quantities such as voltage, strain, pressure, and temperature are introduced. The course also
covers basics of engineering drawings, concepts of GD&T (geometric dimensioning and tolerancing), measurement
uncertainty, signal conditioning, and sensor/microprocessor interface. This is a 2 semester hour laboratory course.

END

ME 10211:

This course introduces the student to many of the tools used by practicing mechanical engineers, including CAD software,
mathematical modeling software, analysis software, rapid prototyping techniques and data acquisition.

Mechanical Engineering Laboratory

END

Machine Design

ME 10301:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01291 and ENGR 01273

This course introduces students to machine design. It deals with the design and selection of machine elements such as
shafts, couplings, bearings, gears, springs, screws and fasteners. Significant emphasis will be placed upon stress analysis and
failure theories. Laboratory experience will include computer simulation and analysis. Design experience will be integrated
throughout the curriculum and culminate in a design project.

END

Introduction to Thermal-Fluid Sciences

ME 10310:

Prerequisites: (CHEM 06100 OR CHEM 06105) AND PHYS 00220 AND MATH 01230 with minimum grade of C-

Introduces students to the thermal-fluid sciences through treatment of classical thermodynamics expanded by emphasis
on conservation principles and introduction to the three modes of heat transfer. Course covers thermodynamic properties,
equations of state, thermodynamic laws, analysis of select elementary cycles, and conservation principles for mass and
energy. A practical design project will integrate computer simulation and analysis.

END

Principles Of Mechanical Engineering For Ece Majors

ME 10320:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00220 and MATH 01230

This course introduces Electrical and Computer Engineering students to basic concepts in statics, dynamics and the
thermal/fluid sciences. Special emphasis is placed upon the design and analysis of systems relevant to electrical engineers
including actuators, motors and other electromechanical devices. Heat generation and removal from electronic devices will
also be given significant coverage.

END

Thermal-Fluid Sciences I

ME 10321:

Prerequisites: CHEM 06100 and (MATH 01235 or MATH 01231 with C- or better) and PHYS 00220

This course introduces students to thermal-fluid sciences. It deals primarily with thermodynamic property relations,
energy transfer, and mass, momentum, and energy balance principles. Students will be able to analyze engineering systems
from a mass, momentum, and energy standpoint as well as perform heat transfer, thermodynamic, fluid static, fluid
momentum, and fluid energy calculations. Laboratory experience will include computer simulation and analysis. Design
experience will be integrated throughout the curriculum and culminate in a design project.

END

Thermal-Fluid Sciences II

ME 10322:

Prerequisites: ME 10321 with C- or better

This course advances student knowledge of the thermal-fluid sciences. It deals primarily with the second law of
thermodynamics, internal/external flow, and stead flow devices. Students will be able to design systems for power
production, propulsion, and heating/cooling. Design experience will be integrated throughout the curriculum and culminate
in a design project.

END

Fluid Mechanics for Mechanical Engineers

ME 10330:

Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C- in the following: (MATH 01231 OR MATH 01235) AND ENGR 01271 AND ME 10310

Introduces students to the thermal-fluid sciences through treatment of elementary fluid mechanics and its relation to
thermodynamics and heat transfer. Course covers theory and applications of hydrostatics; conservation of mass,
momentum, and energy; mechanical energy balances; dimensional analysis and similitude; and laminar/turbulent flow in
internal and external geometries.

END

Heat Transfer for Mechanical Engineers

ME 10335:

Prerequisites: ME 10330 Minimum Grade of D- (may be taken concurrently)

Introduces students to the thermal-fluid sciences through treatment of heat transfer and its relation to thermodynamics
and fluid mechanics. Course covers fundamentals of conduction, convection, and radiation; steady and unsteady heat
conduction; boundary layer flows; forced and free convection for both internal and external flow geometries; blackbody
radiation; and non-ideal surface radiation properties. Heat transfer applications and design of thermal-fluid systems
components are treated.

END

Quality & Reliability In Design And Manufacture

ME 10342:

Prerequisites: MATH 01131 or MATH 01141

This course introduces concepts of quality and reliability for application in design and manufacture. Basic aspects of
dimensioning, tolerancing, and fits are introduced through application of the normal distribution and its variations.
Geometric tolerances of form, orientation, position and runout are presented. Aspects of process capability and statistical
process control are discussed. Concepts of failure and reliability are presented.

END

System Dynamics And Control I

ME 10343:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01291 and MATH 01235

This course introduces students to system modeling, analysis and control. The course focuses on modeling, simulation and
design of mechanical, electrical, electromechanical and fluid systems. Time- and frequency-domain analysis of engineering
systems will be covered.

END

System Dynamics And Control II

ME 10344:

Prerequisites: ME 10343

This course introduces students to modern control systems. The course focuses on modeling, simulation and design of
engineering systems with control. Time- and frequency-domain analysis of control systems will be covered. The course will
culminate in a large-scale design project incorporating a modern control system.

END

Dynamic Systems and Control

ME 10345:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01291 AND (MATH 01235 OR MATH 01201 and MATH 01231)

This course introduces students to modeling, analysis and control of dynamic systems. The course focuses on modeling,
simulation and design of mechanical, electrical, electromechanical and fluid systems. Time- and frequency-domain analysis
of engineering systems will be covered. The course will include 3 credit hour of lecture and 1 credit hour of lab.

END

Introduction To Computer Integrated Manufacturing And Automation

ME 10401:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01283

The course covers the basic aspects of computer integrated manufacturing and automation systems. Hard and flexible
automation concepts are introduced. Various automation strategies are presented. Coding and classification ideas of group
technology are related to computer aided process planning. Topics of numerical control, industrial robotics, and artificial
intelligence are discussed.

END

How it Worked

ME 10402:

The ultimate goal of engineering is creating value for the society. Engineering value creation has been going on from the
moment we began shaping stones into tools; and continues today. This course explores the engineering innovations and
advances of the past. How did these advances contribute to human progress? What was the context within which the
engineering developments occurred? What were the societal, geo-political, and economic forces that shaped engineering?
How did the mechanisms, tools, instruments, and systems worked to create value. The course is organized into broad topics
within engineering to serve as focal points of historical perspectives.

END

ME 10405:

This course covers special topics in individual areas of Mechanical Engineering. Specific pre-reqs are determined by
the nature of the course when it is announced.

Special Topics In Mechanical Engineering

END

ME 10406:

Introduction To Computational Materials Science

Prerequisites: (ENGR 01283 or INTR 01486) and MATH 01235 and CS 04203

This course is intended to introduce two classes of computational stimulation techniques used in materials science:
molecular structure and molecular statics. In addition, emphasis is placed on the numerical methods utilized in each. Topics
to be covered include molecular gelation/polymerization stimulations, basic Monte Carlo methods, use of the
Lennard-Jones potential, static minimum energy unit-cell crystallographic configurations and nonlinear minimization
techniques. Students should have a working knowledge of computer programming methods.

END

Introduction To Combustion

ME 10411:

Prerequisites: ME 10335

This course serves as an introduction to combustion, chemically reacting flow systems and flames. It covers the
fundamental concepts of chemically reacting systems along with many practical applications. Specific topics include
chemical equilibrium, chemical kinetics, premixed laminar flames, detonations, diffusion flames and environmental issues.

END

Introduction To Rocket Propulsion

ME 10412:

Prerequisites: ME 10335

In this course, the principles of rocket propulsion theory are presented along with practical applications of rocket
propulsion design. Theoretical topics include performance analysis of ideal rocket engines, departure from ideal
performance and detailed thermochemical propellant calculations. Practical design issues are addressed for both liquid
propellant engines and solid rocket motors. The course also includes an introduction to electric propulsion.

END

Advanced Heat And Mass Transfer

ME 10413:

Prerequisites: ME 10322

The topics covered in this course extend and complement the Transfer Processes I course. While Transfer Processes I
provides an overview and introduction to the engineering fundamentals of heat transfer , Advanced Heat Transfer will
provide a deeper knowledge of heat transfer principles, and will allow more rigorous and open-ended problems to be
examined. The course will include two additional topics: radiation and mass transfer. Students successfully completing this
course will be able to solve a wider range of heat and mass transfer problems encountered in industry.

END

Introduction To Energy Conversion Systems

ME 10414:

Prerequisites: ME 10335

This course will introduce energy conversion technologies for the generation of electrical power. Topics will include a
review of power cycles, steam and gas cycles, generation of thermal power, combustion and fuels, steam power plant design
considerations, gas turbine power plant operation and design considerations, combined cycles, co-generation, nuclear
power, alternative energy sources, fuel cells, and environmental considerations in power generation.

END

Introduction To Gas Dynamics

ME 10421:

Prerequisites: ME 10330

This course emphasizes application of the conservation equations of mass, momentum and energy to solve problems in
one-dimensional and two-dimensional compressible flow. Specific applications of one-dimensional compressible flow
include one-dimensional isentropic flow, flow with area change, adiabatic flow with friction, normal shock waves and flow
with heat addition. The method of characteristics is introduced to solve two-dimensional compressible flow problems.

END

Introduction To Computational Fluid Dynamics

ME 10422:

Prerequisites: ME 10330

This course introduces computational fluid dynamics (CFD) using a primarily software-based approach. Following an
overview of the key steps involved with CFD, the class reviews the fundamental mathematics that govern fluid dynamics. An
overview of governing equation descretization techniques is presented with assignments that involve building custom
algorithms to solve simplified CFD problems. CFD essentials such as consisitency, stability and convergence are covered
in-depth. Several modeling labs are used to build software skill and explore internal and external flows that are largely
incompressible and viscous. The final weeks of this class are dedicated to a final project on a student-selected topic.

END

ME 10430:

Introduction to Reliability Engineering

Prerequisites: MATH 01235 or (MATH 01235 and MATH 01231)

This course introduces the background, important topics, and practical aspect of reliability engineering. It covers critical
concepts such as reliability mathematics, life data analysis, probability plotting, reliability prediction, reliability modeling,
design for reliability, design of experiments, and analysis of variance. The course also examines how reliability engineering
can be used in applications, especially in mechanical systems.

END

Introduction to Renewable Energy: Photovoltaics & Energy Harvesting

ME 10433:

This course covers concepts and technologies related to renewable energy. The emphasis will be placed upon photovoltaics
and energy harvesting. Topics include energy economy, renewable energy concepts and resources, photovoltaics,
semiconductors, p-n junctions, solar cells using crystal materials, thin films, and organic materials, and energy harvesting
using piezoelectric and thermoelectric devices.

END

Introduction to Wind Energy

ME 10435:

This course covers an overview of the wind energy system and its application for power generation. Aerodynamics of wind
turbine blades, prediction of available wind power, wind turbine siting, and generation of electrical power are discussed.
Analysis of environmental impacts and offshore wind farms are introduced.

END

Introduction to Advanced Manufacturing

ME 10440:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01283

This course will provide students with knowledge of modern manufacturing processes, how design is optimized for
manufacture, and information on future directions of manufacturing, such as additive (3D printing) manufacturing
techniques and the use of digital data across the product life cycle. The course will also discuss the taxonomy of
manufacturing processes and provide an examination of current state of the art manufacturing with an emphasis on trends
and directions in manufacturing, the relationship of digital data to design and production, and the impact of supply chain on
production decisions.

END

Advanced Mechanism Design For Undergraduates

ME 10441:

Prerequisites: ME 10101 and MATH 01235

This course presents an indepth coverage of the design of mechanisms using matrix methods as the platform to model,
synthesize, analyze and simulate mechanisms. It covers advanced design techniques that include type synthesis, numerical
optimization techniques as applied to mechanism design synthesis, as well as branch defects and circuit defects that occur
during mechanism synthesis. In addition, it covers the modeling and simulation of mechanical systems using appropriate
mechanism design software. Students will perform analysis and simulation of mechanisms.

END

Mechatronics

ME 10442:

Prerequisites: ECE 09205

This course introduces the students to the design and development of mechatronic systems. It introduces the students to
the multidisciplinary nature of mechatronic products and teaches them to design and develop such products. Students will
learn about mechatronic design philosophy, mechatronic system modeling, sensors, actuators, microprocessors and their
interfaces. The course project will involve the design of a real-world mechatronic system.

END

Design For X

ME 10443:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01303

This course introduces the students to the design of systems from Design for X perspective. The Design for X course
teaches how to deal with conflicting and ever increasing number of constraints in the design process. It teaches the students
to adopt a systematic design approach that addresses issues related to manufacture, assembly, environment, reliability and
other factors from concept design stage to product manufacture. Students also learn to customize CAD systems with their
own intelligent design assistants to help them in the design process.

END

Automotive Engineering 1 - Internal Combustion Engines

ME 10444:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01291, ME 10101, ME 10301, ME 10310

This Course deals with the engineering of automobiles at the undergraduate level. The course draws upon knowledge
fromthe fields of dynamics, thermodynamics, fluid mechanics, heat transfer, and machine design. Topics covered include
vehicle dynamics, internal combustion engines, power transmission, and advanced technology vehicles. The course includes
appropriate exams and automobile related design project.

END

Automotive Engineering - Powertrains

ME 10445:

Prerequisites: ME 10301

This course deals with the engineering of automotive powertrains. The course draws upon knowledge from the fields of
dynamics, thermodynamics, fluid mechanics, heat transfer, machine design, and internal combustion engines in the design
of powertrains. Topics covered include powertrain matching, automatic, manual, and CVT transmissions, hybrid vehicle
transmissions, final drive units, and AWD/4WD systems.

END

Automotive Engineering - Vehicle Dynamics

ME 10446:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01291

This course deals with automobile dynamics and motion. The course draws upon knowledge from the fields of dynamics,
fluid mechanics, machine design, internal combustion engines, and vehicle powertrains in the study of vehicle dynamics.
Topics covered include lateral dynamics, tire dynamics, braking, steady-state handling, transient handling, vehicle stability,
vehicle ride and comfort, and suspension design.

END

Introduction To Advanced Solid Mechanics

ME 10450:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01273 and MATH 01235

This course will provide students with a basic understanding of the methods involved in solving problems that combine
stresses, strains, and displacement in solid bodies. The course extends topics covered in the sophomore-level solid mechanic
course to include derivations of well-used solutions, transformations between coordinate systems, strength, and failure used
in design, and, most importantly, application of these topics to the solution of relevant problems.

END

Introduction To The Mechanics Of Continuous Media

ME 10451:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01273 and MATH 01235

The fundamental concepts governing the behavior of continuous media, primarily solids, are introduced. Governing
equations are derived for classical problems such as the spinning disk. Constitutive laws are employed in the solution of
boundary value problems in both Cartesian and cylindrical coordinate systems. Classical solutions are examined using
symbolic mathematics and finite element software.

END

Introduction To Structural Acoustics

ME 10452:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01273 and MATH 01235

The control of noise is an important part of engineering practice in many industries today. Vital to effective noise control
is an understanding of wave behavior in structures. This course will teach engineers the fundamentals of the generation of
noise in structures, with an emphasis on the phenomena of mechanical resonance and modal behavior. Topics covered
include vibration of strings, bars, beams and plates. An introduction to simple acoustic sources will be given.

END

Introduction To Analytic Dynamics

ME 10453:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01291 and MATH 01235

Newton/Euler and Lagrangian formulations for three-dimensional motion of particles and rigid bodies. Modern analytical
rigid body dynamics equation formulation and computational solution techniques applied to mechanical multibody systems.
Kinematics of motion generalized coordinates and speeds, analytical and computational determination of inertia properties,
generalized forces, Lagrange's equations, holonomic and nonholonomic constraints, constraint processing, computational
simulation.

END

Introduction To The Elastic Stability Of Structures

ME 10454:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01291 and ENGR 01273

Many important structures (e.g. buildings, bridges, aircraft frames) have buckling as a primary mode of failure. Because of
this, it is important for structrual engineers to have at least a cursory knowledge of elastic stability phenomena. This course
will provide senior level Mechanical Engineering students with an overview of elastic stability in structures, and a brief
introduction to dynamic stability, as applied to rotating shafts. Applications of mathematical theory to real-world structural
design problems will be emplasized.

END

Introduction To Nanotechnology

ME 10455:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00222 and CHEM 06100

This course explores the science and engineering at the nanometer scales. Topics include fundamentals of nanotechnology;
types and properties of nanomaterials; methods of fabrication; how these materials are characterized and the potential
applications.

END

Introduction to Special Topics in Mechatronics

ME 10456:

Prerequisites: ME 10442

This course builds on the skills and background knowledge obtained from the Mechatronics course. The students will
further their exploration on more advanced topics as well as expand their exposure to various related fields. The topics
include advanced mechatronics components such as sensing, actuation, and power management, integrated mechatronic
systems such as robots (including forward and inverse kinematics of robotics), unmanned vehicles, and automations, as well
as related areas such as Programmable Logic Controller, Internet of Things, blockchain, ethics, and regulations. As the field
of mechatronics is rapidly evolving, more front-line topics will be included to reflect the future development.

END

Introduction to Composite Materials

ME 10460:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01273 with C- or better

This course presents the fundamental concepts in the mechanics and manufacturing of composite materials. Topics
include micromechanics (rule of mixtures and its applications in homogenization and the effective property determination)
and macromechanics of composites. Classical laminate theory and its application to calculate properties of lamina and
laminate, effects of stacking sequence, etc. are covered. The course briefly discusses failure theories and basic testing of
composite laminates. Simulation and hands-on projects (including composite laminate fabrication) are included to help
students gain a better understanding of composite materials.

END

Introduction To Engineering Optimization

ME 10461:

Prerequisites: MATH 01235

Objective function for minimization and setting up the constraints are presented for engineering problems. Solution
techniques using gradient based methods, zero order methods, and penalty techniques are discussed. Formulation and
solution of linear programming, non-linear programming, integer and discrete programming problems in engineering are
covered. Algorithms are implemented in computer programs for problem solution.

END

Intro to FEA with ANSYS

ME 10462:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01410

This course presents the fundamentals of finite element analysis & simulation using Ansys (a commercial FEA code). Ansys
is widely used by mechanical and aerospace engineering industry. The course introduces methods to model material
properties, describe boundary conditions, and discretize solid bodies into proper finite elements. The Static Structural
Module of ANSYS workbench is covered in some details. Dynamics and transient simulations are also covered using
ANSYS Explicit module. Concepts related to topology optimization and analysis of composite materials (including
multi-scale modeling) are briefly discussed.

END

Introduction to Soft Robotics

ME 10466:

Prerequisites: ECE 09205 or ME 10320

This course introduces students to the fundamentals of the soft robots, wearable robotics, and other bioinspired soft
intelligent systems. A survey of the field will be provided, including recent advancements and comparison to traditional rigid
bodied robotic counterparts. The course focuses on principles of the design, fabrication and modeling of soft, flexible
sensors and actuators. Various actuation and sensing principles as well as modeling and simulation of soft materials and
structures will be discussed.

END

Introduction To Biomechanics

ME 10470:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01291

This course presents an introduction to biomechanics of human motion. The course will encompass the use of engineering
principles to describe, analyze and assess human movement. Topics will include kinematics, kinetics, anthropomethy
applied to the synthesis of human movement and muscle mechanics.

END

Introduction To Biotransport

ME 10471:

Prerequisites: ME 10335

This course introduces biotransport in terms of heat transfer, mass transfer, and fluid mechanics related to the human
body. Some examples include cryosurgery of warts and drug delivery from skin patches. Beginning with biotransport
problem formulation, the course explores software tools that enable mathematical modeling. Fundamental principles of
model validation, mesh convergence, sensitivity analysis, and objective functions are presented. Several modeling labs are
used to build software skill and explore various heat and mass transfer processes inside and around the human body. Medical
device development concepts are presented, making a connection between modeling activities and product development.
The final weeks of this class are dedicated to a final project on a student-selected topic.

END

Introduction To Biomaterials

ME 10472:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01283

The goal of this course is to present an introduction to the numerous issues that factor into the choice of material selection
for biomedical devices. Issues to be examined include mechanical properties, biocompatibility, production costs, and ease of
manufacture. This course will familiarize students with relevant material issues and highlight the process for matching
material performance with the desired design characteristics and functionality.

END

Introduction to Additive Manufacturing & Characterization

ME 10474:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01283

This course covers topics related to the fundamental concepts of additive manufacturing (AM) and materials
characterization. The first 60% of the class focuses on the introduction and basic principles of additive manufacturing,
including but not limited to AM of polymeric, ceramic, and metallic parts. Topics such as ink-based direct writing,
laser-assisted additive manufacturing, thermal spray, and hybrid AM technologies will be discussed. The second part of the
class covers topics on a variety of techniques used to characterize the structure and composition of engineering materials,
including metals, ceramics, polymers, and composites with a special focus on structures fabricated by AM. The emphasis
will be on microstructural characterization techniques, including optical and electron microscopy as well as X-ray
diffraction techniques. Topics related to the novel mechanical characterization techniques will be discussed briefly.
Real-world examples of materials characterization will be presented throughout the course, including microstructural,
mechanical, and failure characterization of additive manufactured structures.

END

Intro to Aerospace Vehicles

ME 10480:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01291

This course provides an introduction to the design of aerospace vehicles, with a focus on passenger jet and combat aircraft.
Fundamental concepts of aerodynamics, aircraft performance, flight dynamics, and structural design are covered.
Unmanned air vehicles and space launch vehicles are also discussed briefly. Student teams are required to perform airplane
conceptual design and submit their project report.

END

Introduction to Aerodynamics

ME 10481:

Prerequisites: ME 10330

This course extends fluid mechanic concepts to study incompressible and compressible flows around symmetric and
cambered airfoil wings and other bodies. Fundamental concepts of aerodynamics including thin airfoil theory, lifting-line
theory, and vortex panel method are covered using analytical and numerical approaches. Wider applications of the course
material include wind turbine blades, automobiles, and sail boats.

END

Intro to Flight Dynamics

ME 10482:

Prerequisites: ENGR 01291

This course provides an introduction to flight dynamics of airplanes. Flight dynamic equations of unsteady motion and
linearized EOM are presented. Stability and control of longitudinal and lateral - directional motions are studied. Student
teams are required to perform S&C analysis of an airplane and submit a project report.

END

Engineering Graphics for MET

MET 07102:

This course covers fundamentals in drafting techniques, graphics, computer-aided design and manufacturing. Students will
gain a foundation in CAD and also get an introduction to manufacturing models and cutter location data using CAD/CAM
software as AutoDesk Fusion 360 and SolidWorks. This will prepare them for advanced engineering tech design and CNC
programming.

END

CNC Programing

MET 07252:

Prerequisites: MET 07102

This course is a study of the capabilities, programming procedures, advantages, and disadvantages of numerical control
(N/C) and computerized numerical control (CNC) metalworking machine tools. Manual methods for generating, debugging,
and running point-to-point and continuous path programs including linear and circular interpolation, canned cycles, loops,
and subroutines to produce work pieces of increasing complexity. Lecture and laboratory.

END

MET 07255:

This course is designed to create complex solutions to typical engineering challenges. The solution to these challenges can
be completed utilizing the use of a structured programming code.

Matlab Programming for MET

END

Statics for MET

MET 07271:

Corequisites: MATH 01130

This course covers vector calculation of forces, moments, and equilibrium of particles and rigid bodies, centroid and
moment of inertia. Students will gain an adequate knowledge of concentrated and distributed forces and develop the
necessary skills to analyze a moderately complicated system.

END

MET 07291:

Prerequisites: MET 07271

This course covers Kinematics and Kinetics, the work-energy principle, impulse and momentum, rigid body motion.

Dynamics for MET

END

MUS 01029:

The student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into this course. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for vocal majors.

Major Applied Voice 3

END

MUS 01050:

Students perform for both faculty and students. Seven or eight semesters are required, depending on the chosen
curriculum.

Student Recitals

END

MUS 01051:

Students perform for both faculty and students. Seven or eight semesters are required, depending on the chosen
curriculum.

Student Recitals

END

MUS 01053:

Students perform for both faculty and students. Seven or eight semesters are required, depending on the chosen
curriculum.

Student Recitals

END

MUS 01054:

Students perform for both faculty and students. Seven or eight semesters are required, depending on the chosen
curriculum.

Student Recitals

END

MUS 01055:

Students perform for both faculty and students. Seven or eight semesters are required, depending on the chosen
curriculum.

Student Recitals

END

MUS 01056:

Students perform for both faculty and students. Seven or eight semesters are required, depending on the chosen
curriculum.

Student Recitals

END

MUS 01057:

Students perform for both faculty and students. Seven or eight semesters are required, depending on the chosen
curriculum.

Student Recitals

END

Professional Applied Instrument 1

MUS 01101:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrument 2

MUS 01102:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Major Applied Instrument 1

MUS 01103:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Major Applied Instrument 2

MUS 01104:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Secondary Applied Instrument 1

MUS 01105:

An intensive study of the major instrument (for music minors) or additional instrument (for music majors) in preparation
for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The student must pass a departmental audition before being
accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and ensembles is required each semester. See Department
Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument majors.

END

Secondary Applied Instrument 2

MUS 01106:

An intensive study of the major instrument (for music minors) or additional instrument (for music majors) in preparation
for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The student must pass a departmental audition before being
accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and ensembles is required each semester. See Department
Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument majors.

END

Professional Applied Voice 1

MUS 01107:

A weekly hour private lesson designed to develop the vocal technique by learning the curricular vocal literature assigned for
each level. Emphasis on the aspects of performance: musicality, tone quality, projection, diction, interpretation and style.
For Vocal Performance majors only.

END

Professional Applied Voice 2

MUS 01108:

A weekly hour private lesson designed to develop the vocal technique by learning the curricular vocal literature assigned for
each level. Emphasis on the aspects of performance: musicality, tone quality, projection, diction, interpretation and style.
For Vocal Performance majors only.

END

Major Applied Voice 1

MUS 01109:

A weekly hour private lesson designed to develop the vocal technique by learning the curricular vocal literature assigned for
each level. Emphasis on the aspects of performance: musicality, tone quality, projection, diction, interpretation and style.
For Music Education and Bachelor of Arts in Music students only.

END

Major Applied Voice 2

MUS 01110:

A weekly hour private lesson designed to develop the vocal technique by learning the curricular vocal literature assigned for
each level. Emphasis on the aspects of performance: musicality, tone quality, projection, diction, interpretation and style.
For Music Education and Bachelor of Arts in Music students only.

END

MUS 01111:

Weekly half hour instruction designed to develop the student's vocal instrument. Acceptance is by audition only.

Secondary Applied Voice 1

END

MUS 01112:

Weekly half hour instruction designed to develop the student's vocal instrument. Acceptance is by audition only.

Secondary Applied Voice 2

END

Jazz Improvisation 1

MUS 01113:

This graduated course presents improvisational devices, major and minor scales, chord scales, patterns, jazz harmony, solo
structure and a thorough understanding of song forms. Students learn the fundamentals of improvisation through
performance and written composition. Transcribing solos and learning of the jazz repertoire are mastered.

END

Jazz Improvisation 2

MUS 01114:

This graduated course presents improvisational devices, major and minor scales, chord scales, patterns, jazz harmony, solo
structure and a thorough understanding of song forms. Students learn the fundamentals of improvisation through
performance and written composition. Transcribing solos and learning of the jazz repertoire are mastered.

END

Secondary Jazz Improvisation 1

MUS 01115:

This graduated course presents improvisational devices, major and minor scales, chord scales, patterns, jazz harmony, solo
structure and a thorough understanding of song forms. Students learn the fundamentals of improvisation through
performance and written composition. Transcribing solos and learning of the jazz repertoire are mastered.

END

Secondary Jazz Improvisation 2

MUS 01116:

This graduated course presents improvisational devices, major and minor scales, chord scales, patterns, jazz harmony, solo
structure and a thorough understanding of song forms. Students learn the fundamentals of improvisation through
performance and written composition. Transcribing solos and learning of the jazz repertoire are mastered.

END

Instrumental Techniques Lab A

MUS 01117:

Prerequisites: Admittance into the Bachelor of Music in Jazz Studies

Instrumental Techniques Labs are designed for Jazz Music studies students to hone their fundamental instrument
performance skills and to prepare them for successful performance careers.

END

Instrumental Techniques Lab B

MUS 01118:

Prerequisites: Admittance into the Bachelor of Music in Jazz Studies

Instrumental Techniques Labs are designed for Jazz Music studies students to hone their fundamental instrument
performance skills and to prepare them for successful performance careers.

END

Instrumental Techniques Lab C

MUS 01119:

Prerequisites: Admittance into the Bachelor of Music in JazzStudies

Instrumental Techniques Labs are designed for Jazz Music studies students to hone their fundamental instrument
performance skills and to prepare them for successful performance careers.

END

Instrumental Techniques Lab D

MUS 01120:

Prerequisites: Admittance into the Bachelor of Music in Jazz Studies

Instrumental Techniques Labs are designed for Jazz Music studies students to hone their fundamental instrument
performance skills and to prepare them for successful performance careers.

END

Instrumental Techniques Lab E

MUS 01121:

Prerequisites: Admittance into the Bachelor of Music in Jazz Studies

Instrumental Techniques Labs are designed for Jazz Music studies students to hone their fundamental instrument
performance skills and to prepare them for successful performance careers.

END

Performance Applied Instrument 1

MUS 01122:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or professional performance. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into this course. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester.

END

Performance Applied Instrument 2

MUS 01123:

Prerequisites: MUS 01122

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or professional performance. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into this course. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester.

END

MUS 01129:

Small groups in which the individual performer has the opportunity to develop skills under the guidance of a professional
musician. These small groups will explore literature unique to their composite formation.

Chamber Music I

END

MUS 01130:

Small groups in which the individual performer has the opportunity to develop skills under the guidance of a professional
musician. These small groups will explore literature unique to their composite formation.

Chamber Music II

END

MUS 01131:

Small groups in which the individual performer has the opportunity to develop skills under the guidance of a professional
musician. These small groups will explore literature unique to their composite formation.

Chamber Music III

END

MUS 01132:

Small groups in which the individual performer has the opportunity to develop skills under the guidance of a professional
musician. These small groups will explore literature unique to their composite formation.

Chamber Music IV

END

MUS 01150:

A Seminar which is repeated over four semesters. The Seminar is designed to address topics in jazz education in a group
performance setting.

Jazz Education Seminar

END

Professional Applied Instrument 3

MUS 01201:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrument 4

MUS 01202:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Major Applied Instrument 3

MUS 01203:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Major Applied Instrument 4

MUS 01204:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Secondary Applied Instrument 3

MUS 01205:

An intensive study of the major instrument (for music minors) or additional instrument (for music majors) in preparation
for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The student must pass a departmental audition before being
accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and ensembles is required each semester. See Department
Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument majors.

END

Secondary Applied Instrument 4

MUS 01206:

An intensive study of the major instrument (for music minors) or additional instrument (for music majors) in preparation
for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The student must pass a departmental audition before being
accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and ensembles is required each semester. See Department
Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument majors.

END

Professional Applied Voice 3

MUS 01207:

A weekly hour private lesson designed to develop the vocal technique by learning the curricular vocal literature assigned for
each level. Emphasis on the aspects of performance: musicality, tone quality, projection, diction, interpretation and style.
For Vocal Performance majors only.

END

Professional Applied Voice 4

MUS 01208:

A weekly hour private lesson designed to develop the vocal technique by learning the curricular vocal literature assigned for
each level. Emphasis on the aspects of performance: musicality, tone quality, projection, diction, interpretation and style.
For Vocal Performance majors only.

END

Major Applied Voice 3

MUS 01209:

A weekly hour private lesson designed to develop the vocal technique by learning the curricular vocal literature assigned for
each level. Emphasis on the aspects of performance: musicality, tone quality, projection, diction, interpretation and style.
For Music Education and Bachelor of Arts in Music students only.

END

Major Applied Voice 4

MUS 01210:

A weekly hour private lesson designed to develop the vocal technique by learning the curricular vocal literature assigned for
each level. Emphasis on the aspects of performance: musicality, tone quality, projection, diction, interpretation and style.
For Music Education and Bachelor of Arts in Music students only.

END

MUS 01211:

Weekly half hour instruction designed to develop the student's vocal instrument. Acceptance is by audition only.

Secondary Applied Voice 3

END

MUS 01212:

Weekly half hour instruction designed to develop the student's vocal instrument. Acceptance is by audition only.

Secondary Applied Voice 4

END

Jazz Improvisation 3

MUS 01213:

This graduated course presents improvisational devices, major and minor scales, chord scales, patterns, jazz harmony, solo
structure and a thorough understanding of song forms. Students learn the fundamentals of improvisation through
performance and written composition. Transcribing solos and learning of the jazz repertoire are mastered.

END

Jazz Improvisation 4

MUS 01214:

This graduated course presents improvisational devices, major and minor scales, chord scales, patterns, jazz harmony, solo
structure and a thorough understanding of song forms. Students learn the fundamentals of improvisation through
performance and written composition. Transcribing solos and learning of the jazz repertoire are mastered.

END

Secondary Jazz Improvisation 3

MUS 01215:

This graduated course presents improvisational devices, major and minor scales, chord scales, patterns, jazz harmony, solo
structure and a thorough understanding of song forms. Students learn the fundamentals of improvisation through
performance and written composition. Transcribing solos and learning of the jazz repertoire are mastered.

END

Secondary Jazz Improvisation 4

MUS 01216:

This graduated course presents improvisational devices, major and minor scales, chord scales, patterns, jazz harmony, solo
structure and a thorough understanding of song forms. Students learn the fundamentals of improvisation through
performance and written composition. Transcribing solos and learning of the jazz repertoire are mastered.

END

MUS 01217:

Improvisation in Music is designed to round out the music composer's skillset and prepare them for a successful career in
composition and performance.

Improvisation in Music

END

Performance Applied Instrument 3

MUS 01222:

Prerequisites: MUS 01123

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or professional performance. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into this course. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester.

END

Professional Applied Instrument 5

MUS 01301:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrument 6

MUS 01302:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Major Applied Instrument 5

MUS 01303:

An intensive study of major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The student
must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and ensembles
is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument majors.

END

Major Applied Instrument 6

MUS 01304:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Secondary Applied Instrument 5

MUS 01305:

An intensive study of the major instrument (for music minors) or additional instrument (for music majors) in preparation
for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The student must pass a departmental audition before being
accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and ensembles is required each semester. See Department
Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument majors.

END

Secondary Applied Instrument 6

MUS 01306:

An intensive study of the major instrument (for music minors) or additional instrument (for music majors) in preparation
for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The student must pass a departmental audition before being
accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and ensembles is required each semester. See Department
Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument majors.

END

Professional Applied Voice 5

MUS 01307:

A weekly hour private lesson designed to develop the vocal technique by learning the curricular vocal literature assigned for
each level. Emphasis on the aspects of performance: musicality, tone quality, projection, diction, interpretation and style.
For Vocal Performance majors only.

END

Professional Applied Voice 6

MUS 01308:

A weekly hour private lesson designed to develop the vocal technique by learning the curricular vocal literature assigned for
each level. Emphasis on the aspects of performance: musicality, tone quality, projection, diction, interpretation and style.
For Vocal Performance majors only.

END

Major Applied Voice 5

MUS 01309:

A weekly hour private lesson designed to develop the vocal technique by learning the curricular vocal literature assigned for
each level. Emphasis on the aspects of performance: musicality, tone quality, projection, diction, interpretation and style.
For Music Education and Bachelor of Arts in Music students only.

END

Major Applied Voice 6

MUS 01310:

A weekly hour private lesson designed to develop the vocal technique by learning the curricular vocal literature assigned for
each level. Emphasis on the aspects of performance: musicality, tone quality, projection, diction, interpretation and style.
For Music Education and Bachelor of Arts in Music students only.

END

MUS 01311:

Weekly half hour instruction designed to develop the student's vocal instrument. Acceptance is by audition only.

Secondary Applied Voice 5

END

MUS 01312:

Weekly half hour instruction designed to develop the student's vocal instrument. Acceptance is by audition only.

Secondary Applied Voice 6

END

Jazz Improvisation 5

MUS 01313:

This graduated course presents improvisational devices, major and minor scales, chord scales, patterns, jazz harmony, solo
structure and a thorough understanding of song forms. Students learn the fundamentals of improvisation through
performance and written composition. Transcribing solos and learning of the jazz repertoire are mastered.

END

Jazz Improvisation 6

MUS 01314:

This graduated course presents improvisational devices, major and minor scales, chord scales, patterns, jazz harmony, solo
structure and a thorough understanding of song forms. Students learn the fundamentals of improvisation through
performance and written composition. Transcribing solos and learning of the jazz repertoire are mastered.

END

Secondary Jazz Improvisation 5

MUS 01315:

This graduated course presents improvisational devices, major and minor scales, chord scales, patterns, jazz harmony, solo
structure and a thorough understanding of song forms. Students learn the fundamentals of improvisation through
performance and written composition. Transcribing solos and learning of the jazz repertoire are mastered.

END

Secondary Jazz Improvisation 6

MUS 01316:

This graduated course presents improvisational devices, major and minor scales, chord scales, patterns, jazz harmony, solo
structure and a thorough understanding of song forms. Students learn the fundamentals of improvisation through
performance and written composition. Transcribing solos and learning of the jazz repertoire are mastered.

END

Performance Applied Instrument 5

MUS 01322:

Prerequisites: MUS 01223

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or professional performance. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into this course. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester.

END

Performance Applied Instrument 6

MUS 01323:

Prerequisites: MUS 01322

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or professional performance. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into this course. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester.

END

Professional Applied Instrument 7

MUS 01401:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrument 8

MUS 01402:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Major Applied Instrument 7

MUS 01403:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Major Applied Instrument 8

MUS 01404:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Secondary Applied Instrument 7

MUS 01405:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Secondary Applied Instrument 8

MUS 01406:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Voice 7

MUS 01407:

A weekly hour private lesson designed to develop the vocal technique by learning the curricular vocal literature assigned for
each level. Emphasis on the aspects of performance: musicality, tone quality, projection, diction, interpretation and style.
For Vocal Performance majors only.

END

Professional Applied Voice 8

MUS 01408:

A weekly hour private lesson designed to develop the vocal technique by learning the curricular vocal literature assigned for
each level. Emphasis on the aspects of performance: musicality, tone quality, projection, diction, interpretation and style.
For Vocal Performance majors only.

END

Major Applied Voice 7

MUS 01409:

A weekly hour private lesson designed to develop the vocal technique by learning the curricular vocal literature assigned for
each level. Emphasis on the aspects of performance: musicality, tone quality, projection, diction, interpretation and style.
For Music Education and Bachelor of Arts in Music students only.

END

Major Applied Voice 8

MUS 01410:

A weekly hour private lesson designed to develop the vocal technique by learning the curricular vocal literature assigned for
each level. Emphasis on the aspects of performance: musicality, tone quality, projection, diction, interpretation and style.
For Music Education and Bachelor of Arts in Music students only.

END

MUS 01411:

Weekly half hour instruction designed to develop the student's vocal instrument. Acceptance is by audition only.

Secondary Applied Voice 7

END

MUS 01412:

Weekly half hour instruction designed to develop the student's vocal instrument. Acceptance is by audition only.

Secondary Applied Voice 8

END

Jazz Improvisation 7

MUS 01413:

This graduated course presents improvisational devices, major and minor scales, chord scales, patterns, jazz harmony, solo
structure and a thorough understanding of song forms. Students learn the fundamentals of improvisation through
performance and written composition. Transcribing solos and learning of the jazz repertoire are mastered.

END

MUS 01414:

This course presents the blues scale, major, and minor scales/chords for a thorough understanding of the blues form.
Students learn the fundamentals of improvisation through performance and written composition.

Jazz Improvisation 8

END

Secondary Jazz Improvisation 7

MUS 01415:

This graduated course presents improvisational devices, major and minor scales, chord scales, patterns, jazz harmony, solo
structure and a thorough understanding of song forms. Students learn the fundamentals of improvisation through
performance and written composition. Transcribing solos and learning of the jazz repertoire are mastered.

END

Secondary Jazz Improvisation 8

MUS 01416:

This graduated course presents improvisational devices, major and minor scales, chord scales, patterns, jazz harmony, solo
structure and a thorough understanding of song forms. Students learn the fundamentals of improvisation through
performance and written composition. Transcribing solos and learning of the jazz repertoire are mastered.

END

Performance Applied Instrument 7

MUS 01422:

Prerequisites: MUS 01323

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or professional performance. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into this course. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester.

END

Performance Applied Instrument 8

MUS 01423:

Prerequisites: MUS 01422

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or professional performance. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into this course. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester.

END

MUS 04050:

Students perform for both faculty and students. Seven or eight semesters are required, depending on the chosen
curriculum.

Student Recitals

END

MUSIC THEORY I

MUS 04103:

Prerequisites: MUS 04110 and MUS 04118

A detailed and integrated study of written music theory and aural skills. After a review of the fundamentals, Music Theory
I begins the study of diatonic harmony, tonal sight singing, and melodic dictation. Admission by departmental examination
or successful completion of MUS 04118 Music Fundamentals and MUS 04110 Sight Singing and Ear Training.

END

MUSIC THEORY II

MUS 04104:

Prerequisites: MUS 04103 with minimum grade C- OR (MUS 04130 AND MUS 04132) with minimum grade C-

A detailed and integrated study of written music theory and aural skills. Music Theory II covers diatonic harmony, tonal
sight singing, and melodic and harmonic dictation.

END

Sight Singing And Ear Training

MUS 04110:

The techniques of singing at sight, solfeggio, and taking dictation are reviewed and applied.

END

MUS 04118:

This course leads to a broader understanding of music through study of its basic elements: melody, rhythm, harmony and
form.

Music Fundamentals

END

Professional Applied Instrument 1

MUS 04121:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrument 2

MUS 04122:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

MUS 04125:

A detailed study of compositional devices emphasizing the twentieth century is made. Compositions are written for
available media and performed in class.

Music Composition I

END

MUS 04126:

This is a continuation of Music Composition I. A detailed study of compositional devices emphasizing the twentieth
century. Compositions are written for available media and performed in class.

Music Composition II

END

MUS 04129:

This course presents the blues scale, major, and minor scales/chords for a thorough understanding of the blues form.
Students learn the fundamentals of improvisation through performance and written composition.

Jazz Improvisation

END

Music Theory I - Written

MUS 04130:

A detailed study of the visual aspects of writing and performing music. The corresponding aural theory section must be
taken concurrently. The departmental entrance exams for written and aural theory must be passed before admission to
these courses. These courses must be taken in sequence.

END

Music Theory II - Written

MUS 04131:

Corequisites: MUS 04133 Prerequisites: MUS 04130 and MUS 04132 minimum Grade of C-

A detailed study of the visual aspects of writing and performing music. The corresponding aural theory section must be
taken concurrently. The departmental entrance exams for written and aural theory must be passed before admission to
these courses. These courses must be taken in sequence.

END

Music Theory I - Aural

MUS 04132:

A detailed study of the aural aspects of writing and performing music. The corresponding written theory section must be
taken concurrently. The departmental entrance exams for written and aural theory must be passed before admission to
these courses. These courses must be taken in sequence.

END

Music Theory II - Aural

MUS 04133:

Corequisites: MUS 04131 Prerequisites: MUS 04130 and MUS 04132 minimum Grade C-

A detailed study of the aural aspects of writing and performing music. The corresponding written theory section must be
taken concurrently. The departmental entrance exams for written and aural theory must be passed before admission to
these courses. These courses must be taken in sequence.

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: Bassoon

MUS 04160:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: Bass

MUS 04161:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: Cello

MUS 04162:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: Clarinet

MUS 04163:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: Euphonium

MUS 04164:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: Flute

MUS 04165:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: French Horn

MUS 04166:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: Guitar

MUS 04167:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: Harp

MUS 04168:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: Oboe

MUS 04169:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: Organ

MUS 04170:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: Percussion

MUS 04171:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: Piano

MUS 04172:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: Saxophone

MUS 04173:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

MUS 04174:

Professional Applied Trombone

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: Trumpet

MUS 04175:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: Tuba

MUS 04176:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: Viola

MUS 04177:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: Violin

MUS 04178:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrumental: Jazz Piano

MUS 04179:

An intensive study of one's major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

MUS 04180:

The student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into this course. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for vocal majors.

Applied Voice

END

Music Composition and Theory for Media I

MUS 04190:

Prerequisites: MUS 04110 Music Fundamentals or the written music theory placement exam.

This course introduces students to materials and techniques of contemporary musical composition through their
application in the digital audio workstation.

END

Intro to Diction and I.P.A.: English and Latin

MUS 04201:

"Intro to Diction and IPA: English and Latin" is a fundamental course designed to acquaint the student with the
International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) and its symbols used in classical repertoire. Students will immerse themselves in
understanding, reading, writing and using IPA. The class will also cover the correct pronunciation of Latin and English
consonants and vowels and the lyric diction rules of these languages.

END

MUS 04202:

Study of the phonetic rules and sounds of the classical pronunciations of Italian as found in Art Song and Opera. The
International Phonetic Alphabet is utilized. Singing and class performance is required.

Language Through Vocal Repertoire (Italian)

END

MUS 04203:

Study of the phonetic rules and sounds of the classical pronunciations of French as found in Art Song and Opera. The
International Phonetic Alphabet is utilized. Singing and class performance is required.

Language Through Vocal Repertoire (French)

END

MUS 04204:

Study of the phonetic rules and sounds of the classical pronunciations of German as found in Art Song and Opera. The
International Phonetic Alphabet is utilized. Singing and class performance is required.

Language Through Vocal Repertoire (German)

END

MUSIC THEORY III

MUS 04216:

Prerequisites: MUS 04104 with minimum grade C- OR (MUS 04131 AND MUS 04133) with minimum grade C-

A detailed and integrated study of written music theory and aural skills. Music Theory III covers chromatic harmony and
continues the study of tonal sight singing and melodic and harmonic dictation.

END

MUSIC THEORY IV

MUS 04217:

Prerequisites: MUS 04216 with minimum grade C- OR (MUS 04240 AND MUS 04242) with minimum grade C-

A detailed and integrated study of written music theory and aural skills. Music Theory IV covers musical form, 20th
century techniques, tonal and atonal sight singing, and melodic and harmonic dictation.

END

Professional Applied Instrument 3

MUS 04221:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrument 4

MUS 04222:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

MUS 04225:

This is a continuation of Music Composition II. A detailed study of compositional devices emphasizing the twentieth
century is made. Compositions are written for available media and performed in class.

Music Composition III

END

MUS 04226:

This is a continuation of Music Composition III. A detailed study of compositional devices emphasizing the twentieth
century is made. Compositions are written for available media and performed in class.

Music Composition IV

END

Secondary Applied Piano (Jazz)

MUS 04229:

This course includes a basic approach to playing and using the piano in jazz music through an introduction to chords, chord
symbols, voicings, root movement, scales (and their relation to chords) and song melodies as played and realized by the jazz
pianist.

END

MUS 04230:

Emphasis is placed on learning how to "comp" and solo on the piano. A comprehensive array of advanced chords and scales
is studied, with an introduction to more complicated songs than Secondary Applied Piano I.

Secondary Applied Piano II (Jazz)

END

Music Theory III - Written

MUS 04240:

Corequisites: MUS 04242 Prerequisites: MUS 04131 and MUS 04133 minimum Grade C-

A detailed study of the visual aspects of writing and performing music. The corresponding aural theory section must be
taken concurrently. The departmental entrance exams for written and aural theory must be passed before admission to
these courses. These courses must be taken in sequence.

END

Music Theory IV - Written

MUS 04241:

Corequisites: MUS 04243Prerequisites: MUS 04240 and MUS 04242 minimum Grade C-

A detailed study of the visual aspects of writing and performing music. The corresponding aural theory section must be
taken concurrently. The departmental entrance exams for written and aural theory must be passed before admission to
these courses. These courses must be taken in sequence.

END

Music Theory III - Aural

MUS 04242:

Corequisites: MUS 04240Prerequisites: MUS 04131 and MUS 04133 minimum Grade C-

A detailed study of the aural aspects of writing and performing music. The corresponding written theory section must be
taken concurrently. The departmental entrance exams for written and aural theory must be passed before admission to
these courses. These courses must be taken in sequence.

END

Music Theory IV - Aural

MUS 04243:

Corequisites: MUS 04241Prerequisites: MUS 04240 and MUS 04242 minimum Grade C-

A detailed study of the aural aspects of writing and performing music. The corresponding written theory section must be
taken concurrently. The departmental entrance exams for written and aural theory must be passed before admission to
these courses. These courses must be taken in sequence.

END

Music Composition and Theory for Media II

MUS 04290:

Prerequisites: MUS 04190

A continuation of MUS 04190, Composition and Theory for Media II continues the study of materials and techniques of
contemporary musical composition in the digital environment.

END

Chamber Music I

MUS 04309:

Small groups in which the individual performer has the opportunity to develop skills under the guidance of a more skilled
musician. These small groups can explore literature unique to their composite formation. Courses must be taken in
sequence: MUS04.309, MUS04.310, MUS04.409, and MUS04.410.

END

Chamber Music II

MUS 04310:

Small groups in which the individual performer has the opportunity to develop skills under the guidance of a more skilled
musician. These small groups can explore literature unique to their composite formation. Courses must be taken in
sequence: MUS04.309, MUS04.310, MUS04.409, and MUS04.410.

END

Professional Applied Instrument 5

MUS 04321:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrument 6

MUS 04322:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

MUS 04325:

This is a continuation of Music Composition IV. A detailed study of compositional devices emphasizing the twentieth
century is made. Compositions are written for available media and performed in class.

Music Composition V

END

MUS 04326:

This is a continuation of Music Composition V. A detailed study of compositional devices emphasizing the twentieth
century is made. Compositions are written for available media and performed in class.

Music Composition VI

END

MUS 04329:

Prerequisites: MUS 01301 or MUS 01307 or MUS 01322 or MUS 01313 or MUS 04325

The Junior Recital is the recital performance culminating six semesters of applied lessons for performance majors.

Junior Recital

END

MUS 04332:

Acoustics of Music

END

Stage Band Rehearsal Techniques

MUS 04333:

For music majors only, required in the Jazz Studies and Jazz Education Program and may be elected by others. The course
examines the history of big bands, interpretation and conducting for different styles and eras. Score reading, score
preparations and high school level rehearsal techniques are examined.

END

Arranging For Large/Small Jazz Ensembles

MUS 04361:

Prerequisites: MUS 04241 and MUS 04243

This course provides the experience of writing for the traditional big band and jazz studio orchestra, as well as a small
number of instruments. Students explore the possibilities with voicings, chord selection and compositional structures used
in the aforementioned ensembles. In addition, contemporary compositional techniques are introduced to encourage the
continuation of the ensembles in jazz music of the 21st century.

END

Writing In Contemporary/Traditional Jazz Styles

MUS 04363:

Prerequisites: MUS 04217 and MUS 04305

Students explore contemporary and traditional jazz styles by listening to and analyzing the music of masters such as Chick
Corea, Miles Davis, Duke Ellington, Sammy Nestico along with songs from the be-bop, hard-bop and cool eras. Students
compose scores in this style for performance in class and on Department of Music jazz concerts.

END

MUS 04403:

Students explore the art of arranging songs for choral groups with or without accompaniment. Music for different choral
ensembles is written, rehearsed and sung by the class.

Choral Arranging

END

Orchestration

MUS 04404:

Prerequisites: MUS 04130, MUS 04131, MUS 04240 and MUS 04241

Characteristics of string, wind and percussion instruments (including harp) are examined through lectures and
demonstrations. Transcriptions for ensembles and orchestra are made from piano music and performed in class.

END

Chamber Music III

MUS 04409:

Small groups in which the individual performer has the opportunity to develop skills under the guidance of a more skilled
musician. These small groups can explore literature unique to their composite formation. Courses must be taken in
sequence: MUS04.309, MUS04.310, MUS04.409, and MUS04.410.

END

Chamber Music IV

MUS 04410:

Small groups in which the individual performer has the opportunity to develop skills under the guidance of a more skilled
musician. These small groups can explore literature unique to their composite formation. Courses must be taken in
sequence: MUS04.309, MUS04.310, MUS04.409, and MUS04.410.

END

Professional Applied Instrument 7

MUS 04421:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

Professional Applied Instrument 8

MUS 04422:

An intensive study of the major instrument in preparation for college teaching and/or concertizing professionally. The
student must pass a departmental audition before being accepted into these courses. Performance in student recitals and
ensembles is required each semester. See Department Music Curriculum Guides for specific requirements for instrument
majors.

END

MUS 04425:

This is a continuation of Music Composition VI. A detailed study of compositional devices emphasizing the twentieth
century is made. Compositions are written for available media and performed in class.

Music Composition VII

END

MUS 04426:

This is a continuation of Music Composition VII. A detailed study of compositional devices emphasizing the twentieth
century is made. Compositions are written for available media and performed in class.

Music Composition VIII

END

Senior Recital

MUS 04430:

Prerequisites: MUS 01304 or MUS 01310 or MUS 01401 or MUS 04107 or MUS 01413 or MUS 01422 or MUS 04425

The Senior Recital is the recital performance culminating eight semesters of applied lessons for majors in the Bachelor of
Music programs.

END

MUS 04450:

An in-depth study and examination of musical scores from various style periods with an emphasis on large-scale forms and
structures.

Form And Analysis

END

MUS 04455:

This course is a study of the principles of constructing a multilinear musical texture and the application of those principles
analytically to music literature.

Counterpoint

END

Selected Topics In Music

MUS 06356:

This is an advanced musicology course that will focus on a detailed study of a single composer, style period, or specific
topic from music history. Specialized topics will vary each semester. Course activities include in-depth study of selected
topics, analysis, and research.

END

European Music in America, 1825-1950-WI

MUS 06449:

Prerequisites: MUSG 06.215 and MUSG 06.335 or bypermissions of the instructor.

The aim of this course is to provide a deeper understanding of the musical interactions between Europe and the United
States from the first performance of an Italian opera sung in its original language in America (Gioachino Rossini’s II
barbiere di Siviglia, 1825) until Arnold Schoenberg’s death in Los Angeles in 1951. The course will address issues such as
identity and cultural pride through music, the concept of a musical canon in American, and reception of European culture in
the United States.

END

MUS 08100:

The Wind Ensemble is the university's premier wind band, performing difficult and challenging repertoire. Membership is
by audition only.

Wind Ensemble

END

MUS 08101:

The Wind Ensemble is the university's premier wind band, performing difficult and challenging repertoire. Membership is
by audition only.

Wind Ensemble

END

MUS 08102:

The Wind Ensemble is the university's premier wind band, performing difficult and challenging repertoire. Membership is
by audition only.

Wind Ensemble

END

MUS 08103:

The Wind Ensemble is the university's premier wind band, performing difficult and challenging repertoire. Membership is
by audition only.

Wind Ensemble

END

MUS 08104:

The Wind Ensemble is the university's premier wind band, performing difficult and challenging repertoire. Membership is
by audition only.

Wind Ensemble

END

MUS 08105:

The Wind Ensemble is the university's premier wind band, performing difficult and challenging repertoire. Membership is
by audition only.

Wind Ensemble

END

MUS 08106:

The Wind Ensemble is the university's premier wind band, performing difficult and challenging repertoire. Membership is
by audition only.

Wind Ensemble

END

MUS 08107:

The Wind Ensemble is the university's premier wind band, performing difficult and challenging repertoire. Membership is
by audition only.

Wind Ensemble

END

MUS 08124:

The Jazz Band performs and explores the history of the traditional and contemporary Big Band repertoire such as Duke
Ellington, Count Basie, Woody Herman, Stan Kenton, Maynard Ferguson, Buddy Rich, Bob Mintzer and more.

Jazz Band

END

MUS 08125:

The Jazz Band performs and explores the history of the traditional and contemporary Big Band repertoire such as Duke
Ellington, Count Basie, Woody Herman, Stan Kenton, Maynard Ferguson, Buddy Rich, Bob Mintzer and more.

Jazz Band

END

MUS 08126:

The Jazz Band performs and explores the history of the traditional and contemporary Big Band repertoire such as Duke
Ellington, Count Basie, Woody Herman, Stan Kenton, Maynard Ferguson, Buddy Rich, Bob Mintzer and more.

JAZZ BAND

END

MUS 08127:

The Jazz Band performs and explores the history of the traditional and contemporary Big Band repertoire such as Duke
Ellington, Count Basie, Woody Herman, Stan Kenton, Maynard Ferguson, Buddy Rich, Bob Mintzer and more.

Jazz Band

END

MUS 08128:

The Jazz Band performs and explores the history of the traditional and contemporary Big Band repertoire such as Duke
Ellington, Count Basie, Woody Herman, Stan Kenton, Maynard Ferguson, Buddy Rich, Bob Mintzer and more.

Jazz Band

END

MUS 08129:

The Jazz Band performs and explores the history of the traditional and contemporary Big Band repertoire such as Duke
Ellington, Count Basie, Woody Herman, Stan Kenton, Maynard Ferguson, Buddy Rich, Bob Mintzer and more.

Jazz Band

END

MUS 08130:

The Jazz Band performs and explores the history of the traditional and contemporary Big Band repertoire such as Duke
Ellington, Count Basie, Woody Herman, Stan Kenton, Maynard Ferguson, Buddy Rich, Bob Mintzer and more.

Jazz Band

END

MUS 08131:

The Jazz Band performs and explores the history of the traditional and contemporary Big Band repertoire such as Duke
Ellington, Count Basie, Woody Herman, Stan Kenton, Maynard Ferguson, Buddy Rich, Bob Mintzer and more.

Jazz Band

END

MUS 08140:

The Lab Band stresses improvisation, arranging, solo construction, rehearsal techniques and performance. The group
stresses orchestrational versatility. Students are taught how to create a simple arrangement for the band.

Lab Band

END

MUS 08141:

The Lab Band stresses improvisation, arranging, solo construction, rehearsal techniques and performance. The group
stresses orchestrational versatility. Students are taught how to create a simple arrangement for the band.

Lab Band

END

MUS 08142:

The Lab Band stresses improvisation, arranging, solo construction, rehearsal techniques and performance. The group
stresses orchestrational versatility. Students are taught how to create a simple arrangement for the band.

Lab Band

END

MUS 08143:

The Lab Band stresses improvisation, arranging, solo construction, rehearsal techniques and performance. The group
stresses orchestrational versatility. Students are taught how to create a simple arrangement for the band.

Lab Band

END

MUS 08144:

The Lab Band stresses improvisation, arranging, solo construction, rehearsal techniques and performance. The group
stresses orchestrational versatility. Students are taught how to create a simple arrangement for the band.

Lab Band

END

MUS 08145:

The Lab Band stresses improvisation, arranging, solo construction, rehearsal techniques and performance. The group
stresses orchestrational versatility. Students are taught how to create a simple arrangement for the band.

Lab Band

END

MUS 08146:

The Lab Band stresses improvisation, arranging, solo construction, rehearsal techniques and performance. The group
stresses orchestrational versatility. Students are taught how to create a simple arrangement for the band.

Lab Band

END

MUS 08148:

The Concert Choir is the university's premiere vocal ensemble. It is open by audition only and performs a wide range of
historical and contemporary choral repertoire.

Concert Choir

END

MUS 08149:

The Concert Choir is the university's premiere vocal ensemble. It is open by audition only and performs a wide range of
historical and contemporary choral repertoire.

Concert Choir

END

MUS 08150:

The Concert Choir is the university's premiere vocal ensemble. It is open by audition only and performs a wide range of
historical and contemporary choral repertoire.

Concert Choir

END

MUS 08151:

The Concert Choir is the university's premiere vocal ensemble. It is open by audition only and performs a wide range of
historical and contemporary choral repertoire.

Concert Choir

END

MUS 08152:

The Concert Choir is the university's premiere vocal ensemble. It is open by audition only and performs a wide range of
historical and contemporary choral repertoire.

Concert Choir

END

MUS 08153:

The Concert Choir is the university's premiere vocal ensemble. It is open by audition only and performs a wide range of
historical and contemporary choral repertoire.

Concert Choir

END

MUS 08154:

The Concert Choir is the university's premiere vocal ensemble. It is open by audition only and performs a wide range of
historical and contemporary choral repertoire.

Concert Choir

END

MUS 08155:

The Concert Choir is the university's premiere vocal ensemble. It is open by audition only and performs a wide range of
historical and contemporary choral repertoire.

Concert Choir

END

MUS 08156:

Dedicated to the performance of new music, this ensemble performs the works of Rowan composition students and other
contemporary composers.

Contemporary Music Ensemble

END

MUS 08157:

Dedicated to the performance of new music, this ensemble performs the works of Rowan composition students and other
contemporary composers.

Contemporary Music Ensemble

END

MUS 08158:

Dedicated to the performance of new music, this ensemble performs the works of Rowan composition students and other
contemporary composers.

Contemporary Music Ensemble

END

MUS 08159:

Dedicated to the performance of new music, this ensemble performs the works of Rowan composition students and other
contemporary composers.

Contemporary Music Ensemble

END

MUS 08160:

Dedicated to the performance of new music, this ensemble performs the works of Rowan composition students and other
contemporary composers.

Contemporary Music Ensembles

END

MUS 08161:

Dedicated to the performance of new music, this ensemble performs the works of Rowan composition students and other
contemporary composers.

Contemporary Music Ensemble

END

MUS 08162:

Dedicated to the performance of new music, this ensemble performs the works of Rowan composition students and other
contemporary composers.

Contemporary Music Ensemble

END

MUS 08163:

Dedicated to the performance of new music, this ensemble performs the works of Rowan composition students and other
contemporary composers.

Contemporary Music Ensemble

END

Opera Company

MUS 08188:

The Opera Company is designed to give singers the opportunity to develop and refine singing/acting skills through the
study of operatic literature. Students will present the assigned literature in a staged performance at the end of the semester.
Solo roles by audition. The opera chorus is open to all without audition. Previous choral experience is suggested.

END

Opera Company

MUS 08189:

The Opera Company is designed to give singers the opportunity to develop and refine singing/acting skills through the
study of operatic literature. Students will present the assigned literature in a staged performance at the end of the semester.
Solo roles by audition. The opera chorus is open to all without audition. Previous choral experience is suggested.

END

Opera Company

MUS 08190:

The Opera Company is designed to give singers the opportunity to develop and refine singing/acting skills through the
study of operatic literature. Students will present the assigned literature in a staged performance at the end of the semester.
Solo roles by audition. The opera chorus is open to all without audition. Previous choral experience is suggested.

END

Opera Company

MUS 08191:

The Opera Company is designed to give singers the opportunity to develop and refine singing/acting skills through the
study of operatic literature. Students will present the assigned literature in a staged performance at the end of the semester.
Solo roles by audition. The opera chorus is open to all without audition. Previous choral experience is suggested.

END

Opera Company

MUS 08192:

The Opera Company is designed to give singers the opportunity to develop and refine singing/acting skills through the
study of operatic literature. Students will present the assigned literature in a staged performance at the end of the semester.
Solo roles by audition. The opera chorus is open to all without audition. Previous choral experience is suggested.

END

Opera Company

MUS 08193:

The Opera Company is designed to give singers the opportunity to develop and refine singing/acting skills through the
study of operatic literature. Students will present the assigned literature in a staged performance at the end of the semester.
Solo roles by audition. The opera chorus is open to all without audition. Previous choral experience is suggested.

END

Opera Company

MUS 08194:

The Opera Company is designed to give singers the opportunity to develop and refine singing/acting skills through the
study of operatic literature. Students will present the assigned literature in a staged performance at the end of the semester.
Solo roles by audition. The opera chorus is open to all without audition. Previous choral experience is suggested.

END

Opera Company

MUS 08195:

The Opera Company is designed to give singers the opportunity to develop and refine singing/acting skills through the
study of operatic literature. Students will present the assigned literature in a staged performance at the end of the semester.
Solo roles by audition. The opera chorus is open to all without audition. Previous choral experience is suggested.

END

MUS 08211:

The Women's Choir is open to all who wish to participate and performs high quality music written for women's voices.

Soprano-Alto Chorus

END

MUS 08212:

The Women's Choir is open to all who wish to participate and performs high quality music written for women's voices.

Soprano-Alto Chorus

END

MUS 08213:

The Women's Choir is open to all who wish to participate and performs high quality music written for women's voices.

Soprano-Alto Chorus

END

MUS 08214:

The Women's Choir is open to all who wish to participate and performs high quality music written for women's voices.

Soprano-Alto Chorus

END

MUS 08215:

The Women's Choir is open to all who wish to participate and performs high quality music written for women's voices.

Soprano-Alto Chorus

END

MUS 08216:

The Women's Choir is open to all who wish to participate and performs high quality music written for women's voices.

Soprano-Alto Chorus

END

MUS 08217:

The Women's Choir is open to all who wish to participate and performs high quality music written for women's voices.

Soprano-Alto Chorus

END

MUS 08218:

The Women's Choir is open to all who wish to participate and performs high quality music written for women's voices.

Soprano-Alto Chorus

END

Jazz Guitar Ensemble

MUS 08227:

The majority of performance and educational experiences for a jazz guitarist will be in the form of a small ensemble. Issues
such as accompanying melody, accompanying soloists and vocalists, setting up introductions, chord melody presentation,
voicing with other chord instruments, leading endings, starting songs, reading chord symbols and single lines are extensively
analyzed and mastered.

END

Jazz Guitar Ensemble

MUS 08228:

The majority of performance and educational experiences for a jazz guitarist will be in the form of a small ensemble. Issues
such as accompanying melody, accompanying soloists and vocalists, setting up introductions, chord melody presentation,
voicing with other chord instruments, leading endings, starting songs, reading chord symbols and single lines are extensively
analyzed and mastered.

END

Jazz Guitar Ensemble

MUS 08229:

The majority of performance and educational experiences for a jazz guitarist will be in the form of a small ensemble. Issues
such as accompanying melody, accompanying soloists and vocalists, setting up introductions, chord melody presentation,
voicing with other chord instruments, leading endings, starting songs, reading chord symbols and single lines are extensively
analyzed and mastered.

END

Jazz Guitar Ensemble

MUS 08230:

The majority of performance and educational experiences for a jazz guitarist will be in the form of a small ensemble. Issues
such as accompanying melody, accompanying soloists and vocalists, setting up introductions, chord melody presentation,
voicing with other chord instruments, leading endings, starting songs, reading chord symbols and single lines are extensively
analyzed and mastered.

END

Jazz Guitar Ensemble

MUS 08231:

The majority of performance and educational experiences for a jazz guitarist will be in the form of a small ensemble. Issues
such as accompanying melody, accompanying soloists and vocalists, setting up introductions, chord melody presentation,
voicing with other chord instruments, leading endings, starting songs, reading chord symbols and single lines are extensively
analyzed and mastered.

END

Jazz Guitar Ensemble

MUS 08232:

The majority of performance and educational experiences for a jazz guitarist will be in the form of a small ensemble. Issues
such as accompanying melody, accompanying soloists and vocalists, setting up introductions, chord melody presentation,
voicing with other chord instruments, leading endings, starting songs, reading chord symbols and single lines are extensively
analyzed and mastered.

END

Jazz Guitar Ensemble

MUS 08233:

The majority of performance and educational experiences for a jazz guitarist will be in the form of a small ensemble. Issues
such as accompanying melody, accompanying soloists and vocalists, setting up introductions, chord melody presentation,
voicing with other chord instruments, leading endings, starting songs, reading chord symbols and single lines are extensively
analyzed and mastered.

END

MUS 08234:

Jazz Guitar Ensemble

END

MUS 08235:

Composition Workshop is a composition community that provides forum for feedback and performance of original works
within a community of music composers.

Composition Workshop

END

MUS 08236:

Composition Workshop is a composition community that provides forum for feedback and performance of original works
within a community of music composers.

Composition Workshop

END

MUS 08237:

Composition Workshop is a composition community that provides forum for feedback and performance of original works
within a community of music composers.

Composition Workshop

END

MUS 08238:

Composition Workshop is a composition community that provides forum for feedback and performance of original works
within a community of music composers.

Composition Workshop

END

MUS 08239:

Composition Workshop is a composition community that provides forum for feedback and performance of original works
within a community of music composers.

Composition Workshop

END

MUS 08240:

Composition Workshop is a composition community that provides forum for feedback and performance of original works
within a community of music composers.

Composition Workshop

END

MUS 08241:

Composition Workshop is a composition community that provides forum for feedback and performance of original works
within a community of music composers.

Composition Workshop

END

MUS 08242:

Composition Workshop is a composition community that provides forum for feedback and performance of original works
within a community of music composers.

Composition Workshop

END

University Chorus

MUS 08252:

University Chorus is a mixed-voice ensemble that is open - by audition - to all majors from the entire campus community.
Literature is varied and representative of all periods of Western music including contemporary compositions and
non-Western genres. Performances are scheduled throughout each semester and may include collaborations with other
ensembles. In addition to performance, there is an emphasis on improving sight-singing, diction, and ensemble skills.

END

Chamber Choir

MUS 08260:

Chamber Choir, commonly referred to as Cantati Tutti, is a mixed-voice ensemble that is open to every musician from the
entire campus community without audition. The aim of the choir is to facilitate access to music making at a high level of
artistry through singing together as a community, utilizing non-traditional repertoire and performance practices. This
course is open to music majors, non-majors, all members of the university community including faculty and staff, and
includes alumni and community members and welcomes singers at all musical skill levels.

END

Marching Band

MUS 08268:

Students rehearse and perform as members of the Rowan University Marching Band for home football games, select
off-campus events, and other special presentations. Instruction will focus on the techniques of both instrumental music
performance and marching/movement. NOTE: Attendance at a pre-season band camp prior to the start of fall semester
classes is required.

END

Marching Band

MUS 08269:

Students rehearse and perform as members of the Rowan University Marching Band for home football games, select
off-campus events, and other special presentations. Instruction will focus on the techniques of both instrumental music
performance and marching/movement. NOTE: Attendance at a pre-season band camp prior to the start of fall semester
classes is required.

END

Marching Band

MUS 08270:

Students rehearse and perform as members of the Rowan University Marching Band for home football games, select
off-campus events, and other special presentations. Instruction will focus on the techniques of both instrumental music
performance and marching/movement. NOTE: Attendance at a pre-season band camp prior to the start of fall semester
classes is required.

END

Marching Band

MUS 08271:

Students rehearse and perform as members of the Rowan University Marching Band for home football games, select
off-campus events, and other special presentations. Instruction will focus on the techniques of both instrumental music
performance and marching/movement. NOTE: Attendance at a pre-season band camp prior to the start of fall semester
classes is required.

END

Symphonic Band

MUS 09106:

Prerequisites: Audition Required. Please contact the Conductor to schedule audition.

The Rowan University Symphonic Band is an ensemble for woodwind, brass and percussion players. Repertoire performed
is representative of the finest in wind literature, including musical styles from the Renaissance through today. Innovative
programming allows student-musicians to perform and interact with Rowan’s outstanding faculty, visiting guest artists, and
composers from around the world.

END

Symphonic Band

MUS 09107:

Prerequisites: Audition Required. Please contact the Conductor to schedule audition.

The Rowan University Symphonic Band is an ensemble for woodwind, brass and percussion players. Repertoire performed
is representative of the finest in wind literature, including musical styles from the Renaissance through today. Innovative
programming allows student-musicians to perform and interact with Rowan’s outstanding faculty, visiting guest artists, and
composers from around the world.

END

Symphonic Band

MUS 09108:

Prerequisites: Audition Required. Please contact the Conductor to schedule audition.

The Rowan University Symphonic Band is an ensemble for woodwind, brass and percussion players. Repertoire performed
is representative of the finest in wind literature, including musical styles from the Renaissance through today. Innovative
programming allows student-musicians to perform and interact with Rowan’s outstanding faculty, visiting guest artists, and
composers from around the world.

END

Symphonic Band

MUS 09109:

Prerequisites: Audition Required. Please contact the Conductor to schedule audition.

The Rowan University Symphonic Band is an ensemble for woodwind, brass and percussion players. Repertoire performed
is representative of the finest in wind literature, including musical styles from the Renaissance through today. Innovative
programming allows student-musicians to perform and interact with Rowan’s outstanding faculty, visiting guest artists, and
composers from around the world.

END

Symphonic Band

MUS 09110:

Prerequisites: Audition Required. Please contact the Conductor to schedule audition.

The Rowan University Symphonic Band is an ensemble for woodwind, brass and percussion players. Repertoire performed
is representative of the finest in wind literature, including musical styles from the Renaissance through today. Innovative
programming allows student-musicians to perform and interact with Rowan’s outstanding faculty, visiting guest artists, and
composers from around the world.

END

Symphonic Band

MUS 09111:

Prerequisites: Audition Required. Please contact the Conductor to schedule audition.

The Rowan University Symphonic Band is an ensemble for woodwind, brass and percussion players. Repertoire performed
is representative of the finest in wind literature, including musical styles from the Renaissance through today. Innovative
programming allows student-musicians to perform and interact with Rowan’s outstanding faculty, visiting guest artists, and
composers from around the world.

END

Symphonic Band

MUS 09112:

Prerequisites: Audition Required. Please contact the Conductor to schedule audition.

The Rowan University Symphonic Band is an ensemble for woodwind, brass and percussion players. Repertoire performed
is representative of the finest in wind literature, including musical styles from the Renaissance through today. Innovative
programming allows student-musicians to perform and interact with Rowan’s outstanding faculty, visiting guest artists, and
composers from around the world.

END

Symphonic Band

MUS 09113:

Prerequisites: Audition Required. Please contact theConductor to schedule audition.

The Rowan University Symphonic Band is an ensemble for woodwind, brass and percussion players. Repertoire performed
is representative of the finest in wind literature, including musical styles from the Renaissance through today. Innovative
programming allows student-musicians to perform and interact with Rowan’s outstanding faculty, visiting guest artists, and
composers from around the world.

END

String Orchestra

MUS 09114:

Prerequisites: No audition is required. Students are expected to have some background in playing a string instrument.

String Orchestra is for students who have some experience with the violin, viola, cello or double bass, but who are not
music majors. The orchestra will rehearse twice a week and give one public concert each semester. No audition is necessary.
This course may be repeated.

END

String Orchestra

MUS 09115:

Prerequisites: No audition is required. Students are expected to have some background in playing a string instrument.

String Orchestra is for students who have some experience with the violin, viola, cello or double bass, but who are not
music majors. The orchestra will rehearse twice a week and give one public concert each semester. No audition is necessary.
This course may be repeated.

END

String Orchestra

MUS 09116:

Prerequisites: No audition is required. Students are expected to have some background in playing a string instrument.

String Orchestra is for students who have some experience with the violin, viola, cello or double bass, but who are not
music majors. The orchestra will rehearse twice a week and give one public concert each semester. No audition is necessary.
This course may be repeated.

END

String Orchestra

MUS 09117:

Prerequisites: No audition is required. Students are expected to have some background in playing a string instrument.

String Orchestra is for students who have some experience with the violin, viola, cello or double bass, but who are not
music majors. The orchestra will rehearse twice a week and give one public concert each semester. No audition is necessary.
This course may be repeated.

END

String Orchestra

MUS 09118:

Prerequisites: No audition is required. Students are expected to have some background in playing a string instrument.

String Orchestra is for students who have some experience with the violin, viola, cello or double bass, but who are not
music majors. The orchestra will rehearse twice a week and give one public concert each semester. No audition is necessary.
This course may be repeated.

END

String Orchestra

MUS 09119:

Prerequisites: No audition is required. Students are expected to have some background in playing a string instrument.

String Orchestra is for students who have some experience with the violin, viola, cello or double bass, but who are not
music majors. The orchestra will rehearse twice a week and give one public concert each semester. No audition is necessary.
This course may be repeated.

END

String Orchestra

MUS 09120:

Prerequisites: No audition is required. Students are expected to have some background in playing a string instrument.

String Orchestra is for students who have some experience with the violin, viola, cello or double bass, but who are not
music majors. The orchestra will rehearse twice a week and give one public concert each semester. No audition is necessary.
This course may be repeated.

END

String Orchestra

MUS 09121:

Prerequisites: No audition is required. Students are expected to have some background in playing a string instrument.

String Orchestra is for students who have some experience with the violin, viola, cello or double bass, but who are not
music majors. The orchestra will rehearse twice a week and give one public concert each semester. No audition is necessary.
This course may be repeated.

END

MUS 32218:

Vocal Pedagogy

Prerequisites: MUS 04130 and MUS 04131

Basic principles and techniques of training the solo voice are addressed in this course. A survey of the history of vocal
pedagogy, the anatomy of the voice and resource materials for teaching voices of all ages included. Students will experience
practical training in teaching voice through class demonstration. Recommended for vocal majors at junior level and above.

END

Piano Pedagogy

MUS 32219:

Method books for beginners and elementary students are examined and compared. The pedagogy of piano technique and
interpretation is emphasized. Must be preceded by freshman and sophomore piano class or waiver of these requirements.
This course may not be offered annually.

END

Business of Music I

MUS 40111:

The student will be able to learn about the commercial aspects of the music business; introduces music students to music
publishing, music copyright laws, music licensing, artist management, recording industry, music in advertising, etc. Field
trips play a very important role in the development of this course. Finally, the students will be made aware of careers in
music other than music education and performance.

END

Business of Music II

MUS 40113:

Prerequisites: MUS 40111

This course is a continuation of Business of Music I. Record deals, touring, promotion, publishing, and copyright are
studied in more detail. Research and analysis of music-industry business models are introduced.

END

Audio Recording I

MUS 40121:

This course explores the techniques of audio recording. A study of equipment, microphones and microphone placement,
sequencing programs and acoustics is integrated with hands-on training. Students actually record and produce finished
products of recorded music or speech.

END

Computer Technology & Music I

MUS 40122:

This course focuses on the development of the student's skills in using digital audio software to create and edit audio files,
repair field recordings, mix multi-track arrangements, synchronize audio and video, and perform other creative sound design
techniques. Projects in these software environments are designed to develop fundamental musicianship, creativity, and a
refined aesthetic sensibility.

END

History of Popular Music

MUS 40201:

A survey of the history and influence of popular music on modern culture, particularly in the United States and United
Kingdom. Students will learn about how music has evolved, influenced, and been influenced by popular culture in the 20th
and 21st centuries.

END

Introduction to Music Performance

MUS 40202:

Prerequisites: Music Industry majors only or permission of Instructor.

This course will provide a basic introduction of the typical performance skills utilized by performance ensembles. Students
will participate in a variety of workshops and performances and learn how each popular instrument is played (including
guitar, bass, piano, drums, stings, and wind instruments as well as percussion workshops). In-class performances will teach
performance skills such as how to develop a stage presence, using body language, handling a microphone, and dealing with
unexpected situations during a live performance. This course culminates in a final concert.

END

Music Industry Internship I

MUS 40211:

Prerequisites: MUS 40111 and MUS 40113

This internship course provides students with field experience in the music industry. Under professional supervision,
students practice theories and skills learned in the classroom and learn professionalism that will prepare them for productive
employment upon graduation. Students keep a detailed log of working hours, write an analytical critique of the practicum,
begin building a professional network, and are evaluated by their faculty supervisor and employer exit survey. The learning
process is monitored by Music Industry program faculty members.

END

Music Publishing

MUS 40212:

Prerequisites: MUS 40111 and MUS 40113

The course provides an in-depth view of the music publishing industry. Topics covered include copyrights, publishing
contracts, songwriter deals, how to register musical work, collection royalties, and revenue streams. This business aspects of
music writing and composition are covered, as is a brief history of music publishing industry.

END

Touring and Concert Promotion

MUS 40213:

Prerequisites: MUS 40111 and MUS 40113

This course provides an in-depth view of the touring and concert promotion industry. Topics covered include bookings,
ticketing, planning a tour, promotion, working with key players in the industry, logistics, contracts, and more. Students will
participate in the production of a live concert.

END

Audio Recording II

MUS 40221:

Prerequisites: MUS 40121

In this course, students make a recorded project using advanced recording techniques. Topics include advanced
microphone techniques, compressor types, classic EQ models, effects and professional standards for digital audio recording,
mixing and delivery formats.

END

Computer Technology & Music II

MUS 40222:

Prerequisites: MUS 40122

In this course, students make a recordes project using advanced recording techniques. Topics include advanced
microphone techniques, compressor types, classic EQ models, effects and professional standards for digital audio recording,
mixing and delivery formats.

END

Survey of Record Production

MUS 40223:

Prerequisites: Music Industry majors only or permission of Instructor.

This course provides an overview of how records have been produced in the United States and United Kingdom from the
1950s to today. Topics include technological advances in the audio recording field, key record producers and their 'sounds,"
the role of the producer, and record production techniques.

END

Music Industry Internship II

MUS 40311:

Prerequisites: MUS 40111 and MUS 40113 and MUS 40211

This internship course provides students with a second field experience in the music industry. Under professional
supervision, students practice theories and skills learned in a classroom and learn professionalism that will prepare them for
productive employment upon graduation. Students keep a detailed log of working hours, write analytical critique of the
practicum, begin building a professional network, and are evaluated by their faculty ssupervisor and employer exit survey.
The learning process is monitored by Music Industry program faculty members.

END

Artist Services I

MUS 40314:

Prerequisites: Junior standing, MUS 40111 and MUS 40113

This course is the first section of a three-term course sequence that also includes Artist Services II and Artist Services III.
It provides the hands-on experience of working at a record company. Learning activities include choosing a band for a
record release, developing an image for the project and managing the recording production. Students take on the roles and
responsibilities of the real record-label positions, and these roles are emphasized at all stages of the record-production
process.

END

Entrepreneurship in the Music Industry

MUS 40315:

Prerequisites: MUS 40111 and MUS 40113 and MUS 40212

This course provides an in-depth view of the major technological disruptions and the ensuring business opportunities that
have shaped the music industry, from wax cylinder to vinyl record, cassette, CD, MP3, and Internet streaming services, with
a particular focus on how the digital age has utterly transformed the music industry. Comprehensive research and analysis of
current and cutting-edge music business models and marketing strategies complete this course curriculum.

END

Producing the Record

MUS 40321:

Prerequisites: MUS 40121 and MUS 40221

This course is the continuation of Audio Recording I and Audio Recording II. Students apply record production
techniques learned in previous terms in a hands-on settings by producing an album in partnership with a band. Learning
activities include choosing a band to record, pre-production tasks, managing a recording studio schedule and budget,
recording a band, managing musicians during recording sessions, overdubbing, and analog mixing a mastering.

END

MUS 40322:

Audio for Video

Prerequisites: MUS 40122 and MUS 40222

Students will develop and understanding of the technology, business, and function of music as it pertains to various types of
linear, non-linear and interactive visual media through studying the technical, creative, and post-production processes of
real-world projects and through hand-on projects of their own.

END

Sound Reinforcement I

MUS 40323:

Prerequisites: MUS 40121 and MUS 40221

This course gives students the skill sets to understand and operate professional sound-reinforcement systems for live music
and theatre performances. Topics covered include live audio mixing, sound systems, venues, audio equipment, microphone
techniques for live situations, and how to work with artists, management, and venue personnel.

END

Game Audio

MUS 40331:

Prerequisites: MUS 40122 and MUS 40222

Students will develop an understanding of technology, composition techniques, and sound design concepts that are unique
to the video game industry through real-world projects and analyses of popular game titles. Classroom learninbg will come to
life as students compose music and create custom sound effects in an actual video-game engine.

END

Recording Studio Design and Maintenance

MUS 40332:

Prerequisites: MUS 40121 and MUS 40221

Students will learn to perform basic recording studio repairs and will develop and understanding of acoustics and studio
design. The topics covered in this course include cables, connectors, transformers, power supplies, sound absorption,
diffusion, and room acoustics. By the end of the course, students will be able to identify the sources of common signal path
disruptions, read electronics schematics, and perform basic repairs as well as choose and install sound treatment in a
recording-studio setting.

END

Sound Synthesis and Remixing

MUS 40333:

Prerequisites: MUS 40122 and MUS 40222

The main objective of this course is to develop an understanding of sound synthesis, sampling, and remixing through
in-class demonstrations, lectures, and hands-on projects. This course gives students in-depth instruction and experience in
the various advanced techniques of MIDI sequencing, digital audio recording, editing, and mixing used in the making of
modern pop, dance, and hip-hop recordings. Students will deliver custom-made synthesizer sounds, a sampling kit, and a
remix integrating all aspects of the course.

END

Sound Reinforcement II

MUS 40335:

Prerequisites: MUS 40121 AND MUS 40221 AND MUS 40323

Sound Reinforcement II is an advanced elective designed to enhance skills learned in Sound Reinforcement I and further
explore the technical knowledge needed for a career in live sound. Learn the various types of sound systems used in venues
today and what changes are being made in the near future. Understand the skills and tools needed for system design and
optimization. Study the industry trends that are advancing in the field including networking audio and RF coordination.
Research and design a sound system for a venue.

END

Music Industry Contracts and Copyrights

MUS 40341:

Prerequisites: MUS 40111 and MUS 40113 and MUS 40212

This course provides an in-depth view of music industry contracts and copyright issues. Topics covered include an
advanced study of major record deals, independent record deals, touring contracts, music copyrights, publishing deals, and
agreements between band members. Students will learn to protect their interests and avoid common problems.

END

Public Relations in the Music Industry

MUS 40342:

Prerequisites: MUS 40111 and MUS 40113

This course provides an in-depth view of the public relations of the music industry, covering the skills involved in creating
and distributing effective press release, press kits, and artist kits, cultivating relationships for radio and tour promotion, and
canny social media management and internet communications techniques. Public Relations in the Music Industry addressed
these topics from various points of view. Whether you want to become a PR agent or a recording artist, tour promoter, or
label owner, among other roles, this course offers valuable insights on this vital function of the music industry.

END

Songwriting

MUS 40343:

Prerequisites: MUS 40122, Music Industry majors only or permission of instructor

This course provides skills and knowledge related to writing a pop song. Students will analyze songs, hooks, rhythm, chord
progressions, melodies, arrangements, and lyrics to understand what makes a hit. Students will be required to write and
perform their own original songs and workshop the music and lyrics within the context of the class, working toward finished
songs as class projects.

END

Hip Hop Culture: Music, Lifestyle, Fashion and Politics

MUS 40344:

The main objectives of this course are to discuss the origins of Hip Hop culture and study its influence around the world.
Students will explore the key elements of Hip Hop, understand the importance and necessity of entrepreneurship and
analyze how the Hip Hop Culture has evolved into a dominant force over the years. Students will examine the impact that
Hip Hop has on fashion by helping to catapult the sales and positioning of major fashion and sneaker brands as well as
creating independent clothing lines by way of entrepreneurship. The course will discuss and analyze the unprecedented
effects and influence that Hip Hop has on global lifestyles, language, and politics.

END

Capstone Project in Music Industry I

MUS 40412:

Prerequisites: Senior standing and 56 credits required

This capstone course is required of all Music Industry majors in their senior years and leads into Capstone Project in Music
Industry II (MUS 40413). This two-semester hands-on-project integrates the material covered in Music Industry courses
with practical experience, so that students can integrate various elements of their learning into career-related experience. It
also affords students an opportunity to complete a complex, realistic project where they must utilize and hone skills from
their coursework and internships.

END

Capstone Project in Music Industry II

MUS 40413:

Prerequisites: MUS 40412

This capstone course is required of all Music Industry major in their senior years and is a continuation of Capstone Project
in Music Industry I (MUS 40412). This two-semester hands-on project integrates the material covered in Music Industry
courses with practical experience, so that students can integrate various elements of their learning into career-related
experience. It also affords students an opportunity to complete a complex, realistic project where they must utilize and
home skills from their coursework and internships.

END

Artist Services II

MUS 40414:

Prerequisites: MUS 40111 and MUS 40113 and MUS 40314

This course is the second section of a three-term course sequence that includes Artist Services I and Artist Services III. It
provides the hands-on experience of working at a record company. Learning activities include managing the recording
production, developing an album artwork and creating a marketing strategy, as well as analyzing industry trends. Students
take on the roles and responsibilities of real record-label positions, and these roles are emphasized at all stages of the
record-release process.

END

Artist Services III

MUS 40415:

Prerequisites: MUS 40111 and MUS 40113 and MUS 40314 and MUS 40414

This course is the final section of a three-term course sequence that also includes Artist Services I and Artist Services II. It
provides the hands-on experience of working at a record company; at the end of the third term, students release and launch
their record. Learning activities include managing the mix and mastering of an album, marketing activities, and record
launch, as well as analyzing industry trends. Students take on the roles and responsibilities of real record-label positions, and
these roles are emphasized at all stages of the record-release process.

END

Mixing and Mastering

MUS 40431:

Prerequisites: MUS 40122 and MUS 40222.

This course builds upon the skills acquired in Computer Technology and Music I (MUS 401220) and Computer
Technology and Music II (MUS 40222). Topics includes an advanced look at mixing music for a wide range of music styles,
sound trends, processing. EQing, setting up levels, panning, automation, and using effects such as reverb and delays in
professional and creative ways. The mastering section of the course emphasizes understanding audio signal quality, loudness,
processing. EQing and how to achieve a professional master for various formats such as CD, MP3, and vinyl record.

END

Piano Class I

MUS 97100:

Instruction is given in classes including sight reading, improvising, and playing by ear. These courses must be taken in
sequence, simultaneously with or after the indicated theory courses: Piano Class I (MUS97.100) with or after Written
Theory I (MUS04.130); Piano Class II (MUS97.101) with or after Written Theory II (MUS04.131); Piano Class III
(MUS97.200) with or after Written Theory III (MUS04.240), and Piano Class IV (MUS97.241) with or after Written
Theory IV (MUS04.217). Not open to non-music majors.

END

Piano Class II

MUS 97101:

Prerequisites: MUS 97100

Instruction is given in classes including sight reading, improvising, and playing by ear. These courses must be taken in
sequence, simultaneously with or after the indicated theory courses: Piano Class I (MUS97.100) with or after Written
Theory I (MUS04.130); Piano Class II (MUS97.101) with or after Written Theory II (MUS04.131); Piano Class III
(MUS97.200) with or after Written Theory III (MUS04.240), and Piano Class IV (MUS97.241) with or after Written
Theory IV (MUS04.217). Not open to non-music majors.

END

Piano Class III

MUS 97200:

Prerequisites: MUS 97101

Instruction is given in classes including sight reading, improvising, and playing by ear. These courses must be taken in
sequence, simultaneously with or after the indicated theory courses: Piano Class I (MUS97.100) with or after Written
Theory I (MUS04.130); Piano Class II (MUS97.101) with or after Written Theory II (MUS04.131); Piano Class III
(MUS97.200) with or after Written Theory III (MUS04.240), and Piano Class IV (MUS97.241) with or after Written
Theory IV (MUS04.217). Not open to non-music majors.

END

Piano Class IV

MUS 97201:

Prerequisites: MUS 97200

Instruction is given in classes including sight reading, improvising, and playing by ear. These courses must be taken in
sequence, simultaneously with or after the indicated theory courses: Piano Class I (MUS97.100) with or after Written
Theory I (MUS04.130); Piano Class II (MUS97.101) with or after Written Theory II (MUS04.131); Piano Class III
(MUS97.200) with or after Written Theory III (MUS04.240), and Piano Class IV (MUS97.241) with or after Written
Theory IV (MUS04.217). Not open to non-music majors.

END

MUS 97212:

This course demonstrates and rehearses the skills of instrumental conducting through music for instrumental ensembles.

Conducting-Instrumental I

END

MUS 97213:

This course is an introduction to the art of choral conducting. Gestural techniques, (preparation, pattern, cues, releases,
fermata, expression, and left-hand independence), are developed through class participation and other ensemble situations.

Conducting-Choral I

END

MUS 97228:

This course is designed to enable classroom teachers to utilize and instruct basic guitar techniques with an emphasis on
accompaniment skills.

Classroom Guitar

END

MUS 97302:

A study of rudimental and ensemble techniques of snare drum, timpani, bass drum, cymbals and accessory instruments.

Percussion Class

END

MUS 97309:

Designed for Music Education majors, this course addresses trumpet pedagogy and basic trumpet performance.

Trumpet Class

END

MUS 97310:

Designed for Music Education majors, this course addresses tuba pedagogy and basic tuba performance.

Tuba Class

END

MUS 97312:

Prerequisites: MUS 97212

This course demonstrates and rehearses the skills of instrumental conducting through music for instrumental ensembles.

Conducting-Instrumental II

END

Conducting-Choral II

MUS 97313:

Prerequisites: MUS 97213

Students apply basic conducting techniques to repertoire spanning each of the major time periods. In addition to gesture,
great emphasis is given to score reading and score analysis skills.

END

MUS 97400:

A study of the basic principles of singing taught in a group setting. Students will learn beginners breathing technique, tone
placement and projection through the singing of goup and solo repertoire. Course is open to non-music majors.

Voice Class

END

MUS 97401:

This course teaches the fundamentals of the bassoon.

Bassoon Class

END

MUS 97402:

Designed for Music Education majors, this course addresses clarinet pedagogy and basic clarinet performance.

Clarinet Class

END

MUS 97403:

Designed for Music Education majors, this course addresses saxophone pedagogy and basic saxophone performance.

Saxophone Class

END

MUS 97404:

The fundamentals of reedmaking and repair of instruments are studied.

Reedmaking And Instrument Repair

END

MUS 97409:

Designed for Music Education majors, this course addresses flute pedagogy and basic flute performance.

Flute Class

END

MUS 97410:

Oboe Class

Designed for Music Education majors, this course addresses oboe pedagogy and basic oboe performance.

END

Foundations of Music Therapy

MUS 98101:

Prerequisites: Admissions to Music Therapy Program.

Develop an understanding of the methodological and theoretical foundations of this discipline. Learn how to use music as
a therapeutic tool to treat a variety of clients, as well as the sociological, psychological, and philosophical theories of music.

END

Principles of Music Therapy I

MUS 98102:

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy Program

In Principles of Music Theory I students will learn to interact with people who have learning, neurological, motor, and
medical problems. Students will need to focus on music therapy literature specific for this group of people and be ready to
apply their theoretical studies to clinical work.

END

Music Therapy Practicum I

MUS 98103:

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program

This course will provide an opportunity for students to acquire supervised experience using music therapy, including
assessment, treatment planning, evaluation, and other aspects that support clinical practice. Students will complete a total
of 60 supervised clinical hours as part of this course.

END

Therapeutic Principles for Music Therapists

MUS 98104:

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program

This course focuses on understanding of therapeutic principles and the therapeutic relationship that are at the basis of
music therapy treatment. Topics covered are foundational to music therapy, focusing on therapeutic principles underlying
music therapy. These include awareness of personal motivation and values in therapy, dynamics and process of the
therapeutic relationship, awareness of ethical issues in therapy, group dynamics, multicultural awareness and applications to
therapy, and theories underlying various approaches to therapy.

END

Clinical Piano Skills I

MUS 98105:

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program; functional piano competence; students must have passed the piano proficiency
exam required of undergraduate music majors.

Students learn piano skills needed to implement music therapy in clinical settings. Includes harmonization, accompanying
in various styles, and various styles of improvisation. Course includes application of musical concepts and terminologies,
such as modes, idioms, styles, scales, and various musical forms into clinical scenarios.

END

Clinical Guitar Skills

MUS 98106:

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program

This course is designed to enable students to accompany themselves and to lead others in the singing of simple folk and
popular songs, progressing from simple strumming and finger picking to more advanced accompaniment patterns,
transposition and the use of the capo.

END

Music Applications to Music Therapy I

MUS 98107:

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program

This course will provide an opportunity for music therapy students to apply the music skills that they are learning in other
courses (music and music therapy) to the type of musical situations that they will encounter as music therapists. Skills to be
practiced include leading songs using simple accompaniment styles, playing and singing songs of basic music therapy
repertoire using Q-chord, autoharp, and percussion instruments, and sight reading basic music therapy repertoire.

END

Psychology of Music

MUS 98108:

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program

This course will provide an opportunity for students to learn about psychological foundations of music, including
neurology and the brain, music cognition and perception, emotional meaning of music, musical development and learning,
and testing for musical ability. Students will be expected to apply the knowledge acquired in this course in music therapy,
music education, and other musical interests.

END

Principles of Music Therapy II

MUS 98109:

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program

In Principles of Music Therapy II students will learn to interact with people who have learning, neurological, motor, and
medical problems. Students will need to focus on music therapy literature specific for this group of people and be ready to
apply their theoretical studies to clinical work.

END

Music Therapy Research Methods

MUS 98110:

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program

This course will focus on research methods in conducting, reading, and interpreting music in the context of music therapy;
it will include quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methodologies.

END

Music Therapy Practicum II

MUS 98111:

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program; MUS 98103

This course will provide an opportunity for students to acquire supervised experience using music therapy, including
assessment, treatment planning, evaluation, and other aspects that support clinical practice. Students will complete a total
of 60 supervised clinical hours as part of this course.

END

Clinical Piano Skills II

MUS 98112:

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program; MUS 98105

Further development of piano skills needed to implement music therapy in clinical settings. Includes harmonization,
accompanying in various styles, and various styles of improvisation. Course includes application of musical concepts and
terminologies, such as modes, idioms, styles, scales, and various musical forms into clinical scenarios. Builds on material
learned in Clinical Piano Skills I and includes additional applications to clinical settings.

END

Music Applications to Music Therapy II

MUS 98113:

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program; MUS 98107

This course will provide an opportunity for music therapy students to apply the music skills that they are learning in other
courses (music and music therapy) to the type of musical situations that they will encounter as music therapists. Skills to be
practiced include leading songs using simple accompaniment styles, playing and singing songs of basic music therapy
repertoire using Q-chord, autoharp, percussion instruments, and guitar, and sight reading basic music therapy repertoire.

END

Music Therapy Practicum III

MUS 98115:

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program; MUS 98111

This course will provide an opportunity for students to acquire supervised experience using music therapy, including
assessment, treatment planning, evaluation, and other aspects that support clinical practice. Students will complete a total
of 60 supervised clinical hours as part of this course.

END

Music Applications to Music Therapy III

MUS 98116:

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program; MUS 98113

This course will provide an opportunity for music therapy students to apply the music skills that they are learning in other
courses (music and music therapy) to the type of musical situations that they will encounter as music therapists, refining
their skills in these areas. Skills to be practiced include leading songs using simple accompaniment styles, playing and singing
songs of basic music therapy repertoire using Q-chord, autoharp, percussion instruments, guitar, and piano and keyboard,
and sight reading basic music therapy repertoire.

END

Residency in Music Therapy

MUS 98117:

Prerequisites: Completion of all courses in Music Therapy program; residency is final requirement; MUS 98101, MUS 98108, MUS
98102, MUS 98109, MUS 98110, MUS 98103, MUS 98111, MUS 98115, MUS 98105, MUS 98112, MUS 98106, MUS 98107, MUS
98113, MUS 98116, MUS 98104, PSY 03200

Residency of 1040 hours at an AMTA-or Rowan-approved clinical training center. Application is made upon departmental
approval. Development of music therapy clinical skills. Requires clinical work and ongoing supervision from the clinical site
(residency supervisor) and/or music therapy faculty. Student will plan and lead individual and group music therapy sessions,
write assessment and goal plans, participate in treatment teams, and take part in other activities of the clinical facility. The
residency should be taken at a medical facility.

END

Advanced Clinical Guitar Skills

MUS 98406:

Prerequisites: MUS 98206

This course focuses on the use of acoustic guitar to accompany voice and the use of both to facilitate music therapy
sessions by building on and reinforcing skills from Clinical Guitar Skills, and introducing them to more advanced material.
This will include more complex strumming and fingerpicking patterns, more advanced chord progressions, and further
development of clinical improvisation and composition techniques. Following review of some repertoire from Clinical
Guitar Skills, new repertoire for use with children and adults including: pop, country, folk, blues, spirituals, jazz, and
multicultural, will be introduced.

END

Signals, Systems And Music

MUSG 06100:

This course is an introduction to the analysis and creative production of electronic music. The student will experience
music using the principles of music theory, electronic signal analysis and system development. Both lecture and laboratory
sessions are presented culminating in the development and production of electronic music using recorded sound, software
generated signals and electronically produced signals.

END

MUSG 06102:

An introduction to styles and analysis of music through a historical overview. The techniques of listening and aural analysis
of representative works serves as exercise material for the course.

General Music History

END

Music Appreciation

MUSG 06109:

Music literature is approached through recordings, live performance and appropriate reading.

END

MUSG 06115:

African and European influences, the evolution of jazz styles and the influence of jazz on the musical world are covered.

Growth And Development Of Jazz

END

MUSG 06117:

The elements of music and the development of classical, jazz, and popular musics are studied through hands-on
technology-based activities. No prior musical or technology experience is necessary.

Expressing Music Through Technology

END

MUSG 06120:

The course is a survey of the important compositions written for keyboard instruments, primarily piano, from ca. l600 to
the present. This course may not be offered annually.

Keyboard Literature

END

Vocal Literature

MUSG 06210:

A survey of solo vocal literature through these vocal periods: Renaissance, Baroque, Classical, Romantic, Late Romantic
and Contemporary. Through lecture, demonstration and presentation, students will study the composers of each period,
their body of work, style, interpretation and performance practice.

END

Brass And Woodwind Literature

MUSG 06211:

Brass and woodwind literature informs the music students of the availability of the following brass and woodwind
materials: methods and studies, ensemble literature, solos, books, periodicals and recordings. This course may not be offered
annually.

END

MUSG 06214:

A study of the history of Western music from the Ancient Greeks until the mid-Baroque period. (Students who are not
music majors must have the instructor's permission to take this course.)

History and Literature of Western Music Repertories I

END

MUSG 06215:

A study of the history of Western music from the mid-Baroque period until the crisis of tonality. (Students who are not
music majors must have the instructor's permission to take this course.)

History and Literature of Western Music Repertories II

END

MUSG 06218:

Music and The Child

END

The Singing Music Of African-Americans

MUSG 06220:

This course will be an investigation of the singing music tradition of the music of African-Americans, featuring music from
the earliest field songs and spiriturals, through the latest blues, gospel, jazz, pop, rap, and crossover genres. It will provide
insight into the social, political, and religious institutions of African-Americans as these institutions influenced the
development of music. The course builds on a basic critical music vocabulary.

END

MUSG 06303:

A chronological study and analysis of small and large choral works from the early chant to the present is stressed through
recordings, live performances and class participation. Conducting of choral work is a major activity of this course.

Choral Literature

END

MUSG 06335:

A study of the history of Western music from the crisis of tonality until the early 2000s. (Students who are not music
majors must have the instructor's permission to take this course.)

History and Literature of Western Music Repertories III

END

MUSG 06337:

The variety of musical styles, the function of music in this environment and its psychological effect on audiences of the
past and present are studied. This course may not be offered annually.

Music And The Theater

END

MUSG 06435:

An investigation of little known musical works, utilizing instruments and techniques of style of the period in study.
Performance of these works will constitute much of the study of them.

Collegium Musicum

END

MUSG 06439:

A comprehensive study of compositional and improvisational techniques employed by contemporary jazz writers and
performers. Jazz application of classical twentieth century classical music techniques are analyzed.

New Jazz Structures

END

Music In World Cultures: Asia & Oceania

MUSG 06447:

A survey is made of the musical cultures of the world (excluding western art music), the role of music in society, and its
relationship to other arts. Consideration will also be given to scale structure, instruments, musical forms and performance
standards. Cultural areas of particular concern are Asia and Oceania.

END

Music In World Cultures: Africa, India, Near & Middle East

MUSG 06448:

A survey is made of the musical cultures of the world (excluding western art music), the role of music in society and its
relationship to other arts. Consideration will also be given to scale structure, instruments, musical forms and performance
standards. Cultural areas of particular concern are Africa, India, and the Near and Middle East.

END

Foundations Of Music Education

SMED 01120:

Foundations of Music Education is an introductory course in the music education program. It provides a broad overview of
the field of music education, addressing the historical development of music education in the United States as well as
current approaches and issues in the field. The course is framed by three guiding questions: What is the purpose of music
education?; How can students best explore music?; and How can teachers best create music learning experiences for their
students? In addition, two projects that extend throughout the music education major are introduced: a personal philosophy
of music education, and a digital portfolio.

END

Introduction to Instruction & Assessment for the Music Educator

SMED 01284:

Prerequisites: SMED 01120 and INCL 02210 and ELEM 02210

The course provides an introduction and practice of instructional planning and assessment in the music classroom K-12.
Built on the content and philosophy developed in Principles of Pedagogies in the Inclusive Classroom, this course is a broad
overview of the field of music education K-12. Standards, philosophies, theories, and teaching and learning principles in
Music Education are foundational content in the course. This will enable Music Education students to continue developing
a personal teaching philosophy which was begun in the pre-req course, Foundations of Music Education. The
candidates will develop knowledge and skills to plan instruction based on how children learn music and assess their learning
by designing, reviewing, and reflecting on varied assessments of student learning typically used in the music classroom K-12.
This course is offered both fall and spring semester. This course includes field visits to varying music classroom
representative of the breadth of responsibilities a music teacher may have throughout a career in music education. (i.e.,
elementary general music classrooms, secondary instrumental and choral classrooms, secondary specialized and general
music classes in the public schools in South Jersey)

END

Teaching/Learning Music A: Elementary General Music

SMED 32329:

Prerequisites: C- or better in MUS 04103, MUS 04104, MUS 04216, MUS 04217, EDUC 01284, READ 30319 and SMED 33420

The methods, materials and techniques of teaching music from K through 12 are surveyed. Attention is given to the
developmental sequence in the building of musical concepts necessary for the organization of an effective general music
program in the public schools.

END

Teaching/Learning Music B: Vocal Methods And Techniques

SMED 32330:

This course, along with other courses in a series, helps to prepare students to teach the choral arts in the public schools
with particular attention to grades 7-12. Techniques of teaching, vocal training, choral organization and the philosophy of
teaching choral music are the areas to be emphasized.

END

SMED 32331:

A survey is made of the necessary understanding, techniques, and materials to develop an effective instrumental music
program. Consideration is given to the place of instrumental music and its relationship to the total school program.

Teaching/Learning Music B: Instrumental Methods And Techniques

END

SMED 32440:

This course applies the fundamentals of precision marching and marching maneuvers along with new materials and
techniques for the half-time show.

Marching Band Techniques

END

Introduction to Interprofessional Healthcare Practices

NURS 03100:

This course introduces the student to the knowledge and competencies needed for entry into the healthcare professions.
These include the basic care needs for clients and caregivers, privacy, mobility, infection prevention, therapeutic
communication, and safety. The student will have the opportunity to practice skills in a laboratory setting.

END

Nursing 1: Fundamentals Practice & Mental Health Nursing

NURS 03150:

Corequisites: NURS 03303

This course introduces the student to the fundamentals of nursing practice and the role of the nurse when caring for adults
with medical and mental health disorders. A conceptual approach to learning is utilized to examine the characteristics of
individuals seeking care, factors affecting health and illness, and the roles of the professional nurse. The Essentials Core
Competencies of knowledge of nursing practice, person-centered care, quality and safety, interprofessional partnerships,
informatics and healthcare technologies and professionalism are introduced. The featured concepts of this course are
clinical judgment, communication, compassionate care, diversity, equity and inclusion, evidence-based practice and social
determinants of health. The student will have the opportunity to apply these competencies and concepts when caring for
adult patients in medical-surgical and mental health units and in a simulated laboratory setting.

END

NURS 03250:

Nursing II: Health Promotion/Illness Management of the Child-Bearing Family and Adults with Chronic

Corequisites: NURS 03404 Prerequisites: NURS 03303 and NURS 03150

The course focuses on the care of the child-bearing family and the adult with chronic illness. The student's knowledge of
professional nursing practice is progressed through the application of the Essential Core Competencies of knowledge of
nursing practice, person-centered care, quality and safety, interprofessional partnerships, informatics and healthcare
technologies, and professionalism. The featured concepts of this course are clinical judgment, communication,
compassionate care, diversity, equity and inclusion, ethics, evidence-based practice and social determinants of health. The
student will have the opportunity to apply these competencies and concepts when caring for clients in medical-surgical and
maternal/infant clinical areas and in a simulated laboratory setting.

END

Pathophysiology for Nursing

NURS 03300:

Prerequisites: Current license as a Registered Nurse (RN) or recent graduate of an accredited professional school of nursing

This is a required course for registered nurses that uses a system based life span approach to discriminate between normal
physiologic function and pathophysiologic processes. The course relates manifestation of disease, risk factors for disease and
the principles of illness and injury to therapeutic nursing interventions and outcomes.

END

Foundations Of Nursing Practice

NURS 03302:

This course enables students to explore the historical and theoretical foundations of the profession of nursing. Students
will focus on Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs in providing nursing care. Classroom experience and seminars provide students
with opportunities to utilize critical thinking skills to explore concepts basic to nursing. Faculty supervised learning
laboratory practice and clinical experiences enable students to apply acquired knowledge in a variety of clinical settings. This
course also explores issues that impact health promotion an dthe role of the nurse in promoting health and preventing
disease. Such factors as population changes, health policy, ethics, and the therapeutic nurse-client relationship are discussed.
Assessment of health in individuals, families, and communities is examined. Interventions for health promotion are
discussed along with their application across the lifespan. Finally, future trends in health promotion are reviewed.

END

Comprehensive Health Assessment

NURS 03303:

This course builds upon the Registered Nurse’s fundamental knowledge and skills of health assessment. In utilizing a
systematic approach, the student will develop a holistic approach in assessing the patient throughout the lifespan. Upon
completion, the student will show competency in obtaining a thorough health history and becoming efficient in the physical
skills of inspection, palpation, percussion and auscultation. Differences between normal and abnormal findings will be
explored and appropriate documentation of findings will be stressed. Students will also be exposed to the cultural
differences in health and will incorporate evidence based approaches to assessment.

END

Nursing Informatics

NURS 03304:

This course reviews the information needs and information systems related to nursing practice. Students will experience
the manner in which informatics supports all areas of practice, including education, clinical practice, administration and
research.

END

Pathophysiology

NURS 03305:

Prerequisites: NURS 03303 and NURS 03307

Fundamental concepts of physiology, the changes that porduce signs, symptoms, and the body's remarkable ability to
compensate for these changes are reviewed and extended in this course.

END

NURS 03306:

This course reviews and extends the students' previous knowledge of pharmacological science. It explores mechanisms of
action of drugs used to treat various health conditions at the cellular level. 3 credits Elective.

Pharmacology

END

Epidemiology In Nursing Practice

NURS 03307:

In this course, the professional nursing student is introduced to a population-based approach to health care. Students will
incorporate information on the etiology and predictors of events in order to design health promotion and desease
prevention strategies.

END

Pharmacology of Nursing

NURS 03308:

Prerequisites: A current license as a Registered Nurse (RN) or recent graduate of an accredited professional school of nursing.

This is a required course for registered nurses that will enhance current knowledge of a broad spectrum of pharmacologic
agents. Emphasis is on the administration of drugs using QSEN competencies for safe, effective and therapeutic drug
therapy. Drug classifications studied are about safe drug administration, nursing implications and effects and precautions,
drug interactions, and the potential for toxicity. Pharmacologic considerations that involve, but are not limited to, the legal,
ethical, age, cultural, and risk for dependence are discussed in the current context of our time.

END

Topics In Health Care Ethics

NURS 03309:

Students in this nursing course will examine moral dilemmas created or intensified by recent advances in medical
technology and study ways of analyzing those dilemmas. Discussion topics include: euthanasia and the right to die, abortion,
behavior modification, allocation of scarce medical resources, in vitro fertilization, genetic screening and engineering and
human experimentation. These moral dilemmas will be related to nursing.

END

Nursing III: Management of Acute & Chronic Health Issues Across the Lifespan

NURS 03320:

Corequisites: NURS 03304 and NURS 03309 Prerequisites: NURS 01100 and NURS 01150 and NURS 03250

This course focuses on the nursing care of children and adults with acute and chronic illness. The student's knowledge of
professional nursing practice is progressed through the application of The Essentials Core Competencies of knowledge for
nursing practice, person-centered care, scholarship for nursing discipline, quality and safety, interprofessional partnerships,
systems-based practice, informatics and healthcare technologies, and professionalism. The featured concepts of this course
are clinical judgment, communication, compassionate care, diversity, equity and inclusion, ethics, evidence-based practice
and social determinants of health. The student will have the opportunity to apply these competencies and concepts when
caring for patients in medical-surgical, perioperative, pediatric and community clinical areas and in a simulated laboratory
setting.

END

Gerontological Nursing

NURS 03330:

Prerequisites: NURS 03302 and NURS 03303 andNURS 03305 and NURS 03306 and NURS 03350and NURS 03360 and NURS 03370

This course reviews and analyzes issues of aging from a physiological, psychosocial and cognitive perspective. Emphasis is
placed on health maintenance, ethical considerations and legal issues as they relate to the care of the aging population.

END

Adult Health Nursing

NURS 03340:

Prerequisites: NURS 03302 and NURS 03303 andNURS 03305 and NURS 03306 and NURS 03350and NURS 03360 and NURS 03370

This course enables students to identify multi-cultural interactions as they relate to nursing practice. Classroom experience
and seminars provide students with opportunities to utilize critical thinking skills to explore concepts basic to nursing care
of adult humans (18 years to senescence). Faculty supervised learning laboratory practice and clinical experiences enable
students to apply acquired knowledge in a variety of settings.

END

Childrearing Family

NURS 03350:

Prerequisites: NURS 03302 and NURS 03303and NURS 03305

This course enables students to identify their understanding of the human-environmental interactions and evolving family
patterns within diverse cultures to promote optimal health. The student is provided with an opportunity to understand the
patterns and organization of families, growth and development perspectives, and the nursing implications of common and
complex health patterns from infancy through adolescence. Faculty supervised learning laboratory practice and clinical
experiences enable students to apply acquired knowledge in a variety of settings.

END

Childbearing Family

NURS 03360:

Prerequisites: NURS 03302 and NURS 03303and NURS 03305

This course enables students to expand their understanding of human-environmental interactions and evolving family
patterns within diverse cultures to promote optimal health. The student is provided with an opportunity to understand the
family as a unified whole, its patterns and organization and the implications of common and complex health patterns from
conception through birth.

END

Mental Health Nursing

NURS 03370:

Prerequisites: NURS 03302 and NURS 03303and NURS 03305

This course enables students to expand their understanding of human-environmental interactions and evolving mental
health patterns within diverse cultures to promote optimal health. The student is provided with an opportunity to
understand the organization of mental health patterns as they appear in normative growth and develpment, as well as the
alterations in patterns with resulting nursing implications. The progression will be from common to more complex mental
health patterns as they relate to nursing practice.

END

Holistic Nursing Philosophy, Theories, and Ethics

NURS 03400:

This course examines the factors that affected the evolution of holistic nursing in the United States, describes the scope of
holistic nursing, discusses the five core values and philosophy of holistic nursing, explores the concepts of holistic nursing
ethics, and applies nursing theory to practice.

END

Community Health Nursing

NURS 03401:

Prerequisites: NURS 03303

This course will explore how community health nurses use concepts from nursing and public health to provide
comprehensive, continuous, preventative healthcare thereby promoting health for communities, populations at risk,
aggregates, families, and individuals. This course prepares the RN to BSN student to develop competencies in managing
health status in the context of multicultural communities. Students will be able to expand current knowledge and skills,
develop enhanced research and critically thinking skills with the application of these skills to the multicultural community
and the global society considering the biopsychosocial, cultural, ethical, legal, and economic issues that impact the
community as a client. The clinical practicum focuses on clients with diverse needs in a variety of settings.

END

Environmental And Occupational Health

NURS 03402:

Prerequisites: NURS 03301, NURS 03303, NURS 03305, NURS 03306 and NURS 03304

The relationships that exist between the environment, the workplace, and health are the focus of this course. Key
concepts, principles, and strategies related to environmental and occupational health nursing are explored.
Teaching-learning strategies focus on critical thinking skills related to these areas of health care. Knowledge obtained from
this course will prepare students to assess changes in helath status that may be related to the environment or the workplace.
Students are provided with skills needed to recognize, evaluate, and to recommend control strategies for thses phenomena.

END

Nursing Care Delivery Systems

NURS 03403:

Prerequisites: NURS 03303

The focus of this course is the professional nurse’s leadership and management role within health care delivery systems.
The multi-faceted aspects of the role of the nurse as leader and manager are explored in depth, with emphasis on the role of
the nurse as change agent. Organizational behavior, decision-making, the change process and the management of health care
organizations are components of this course. The concepts of professionalism, leadership-management, research and
teaching-learning are integrated with the professional nurse’s role. This course prepares students to function as change
agents in the health care delivery system. The clinical component focuses on the application of relevant theory and research
as a basis for decision-making. Students are mentored by faculty, and interact with members of the nursing leadership team
to explore Nursing leadership.

END

Research Applications In Nursing Practice - WI

NURS 03404:

Prerequisites: STAT 02100 and COMP 01112

This course introduces students to the concepts and process of research in nursing. Emphasis is placed on writing and
critiquing published studies and developing plans for using research findings in practice.

END

Health Care Policy And Finance

NURS 03405:

The focus of this course is the professional nurse's role in health care policy and finances within health care systems. The
multi-faceted aspects of health care policy making and financing within today's ever-changing health care environment are
explored. Risk management and quality care are integrated into the course. This course gives the student a financial
understanding of the health care delivery system. Students are exposed to the political and legislative process within health
care agencies and health care policy development at the state and federal levels. Ethical and legal issues in nursing and health
care are explored.

END

Holistic Therapeutic Healing and Cultural Diversity

NURS 03409:

Prerequisites: NURS 03400

This course identifies foundational theories and concepts in the development of healing relationships through
identification of nursing competencies in the nurse-patient relationship. The components and principles of cultural
competence are detailed and supported by current literature in the course content in addition to the exploration of
interventions that reflect that competence.

END

Transition To Professional Nursing Practice

NURS 03416:

Prerequisites: NURS 03302 and NURS 03303 andNURS 03305 and NURS 03306 and NURS 03330and NURS 03340 and NURS 03350
and NURS03360 and NURS 03370 and NURS 03403 andNURS 03404

This course examines issues that must be addressed for the nursing student to successfully transition to the role of the
professional nurse. The emphasis is on the application of the professional role in the clinical setting. Faculty supervised
learning laboratory practice and clinical experiences enable students to apply acquired knowledge in a variety of settings.

END

Nursing IV: Management of Individuals and Groups with Complex Health Issues

NURS 03450:

Corequisites: NURS 03300 Prerequisites: NURS 03320 and NURS 03304 and NURS 03309

This course focuses on the nursinre of individuals and groups of patients with complex health issues. The student's
knowledge of professional nursing practice is progressed through the application of the Essentials: Core Competencies of
knowledge of nursing practice, person-centered care, scholarship for nursing discipline, quality and safety, Interprofessional
partnerships, systems-based practice, informatics and healthcare technologies, and professionalism. The featured concepts
of this course are clinical judgment, communication, compassionate care, diversity, equity and inclusion, ethics,
evidence-based practice and social determinants of health. The student will have the opportunity to apply these
competencies and concepts when caring for groups of patients in medical-surgical areas, critical care and emergency
departments and in a simulated laboratory setting. This course focuses on the use of the Essentials of Nursing in the care of
highly complex patients (critical care).

END

Senior Clinical Capstone Immersion

NURS 03451:

Corequisites: NURS 03452 and NURS 03400 Prerequisites: NURS 03401 and NURS 03403 and NURS 03308 and NURS 03405
and NURS 03100 and NURS 03250 and NURS 03320 and NURS 03450

The Clinical Capstone focuses on refining the student nurse's professional, clinical and leadership skills. Each student will
have the opportunity to practice with a unit-based RN to facilitate transition into the professional nursing workplace. The
faculty will provide support for the student and the RN, facilitate the student's application of theoretical knowledge to
clinical situations, and provide on-going formative evaluations. The clinical faculty will also perform a midterm and final
clinical evaluation of each student.

END

Transition to Nursing Practice

NURS 03452:

Corequisites: NURS 03451 and NURS 03400 Prerequisites: NURS 03401 and NURS 03403 and NURS 03308 and NURS 03405
and NURS 03100 and NURS 03250 and NURS 03320 and NURS 03450

This course will provide the student with the knowledge and skills to effectively transition into the role of the BSN
prepared Registered Professional Nurse. The students knowledge of professional nursing practice is progressed through the
application of The Essentials:Core Competencies of knowledge for nursing practice, quality and safety, interprofessional
partnerships, professionalism, and personal and professional development. The concepts of equity, diversity and inclusion,
ethics, heath policy are integrated with the professional nursing role. This course focused on the Student's transition to
Practice and enhances the application of skills acquired throughout the program. Leadership, ethical, professional behavior
and preparation for entry into the nursing workforce are stressed.

END

Advanced Pathophysiology

NURS 05504:

Prerequisites: Licensure as a registered nurse and NURS 03303

This course describes the disordered physiology and clinical consequences resulting from common disease processes.
Seminar discussions focus on alterations in normal functions of major organ systems. Through problem-solving exercises and
case studies, students are encouraged to recognize the pathophysiologic basis of clinical findings associated with disease
processes. This course serves as an essential link between the basic sciences and clinical management.

END

NURS 05505:

Advanced Pharmacology

Prerequisites: Licensure as a registered nurse and NURS 03303 and NURS 05504

This course expands students' knowledge of clinical pharmacology to provide a sound basis from which to engage in
prescriptive drug management. Pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics and pharmacotherapeutics of drug classes are
explored through a variety of teaching-learning methodologies, including seminar discussion, problem-based case study
presentations, focused readings, and web-based exercises.

END

The Logic Of Everyday Reasoning

PHIL 09110:

This course in informal logic aims at improving the student's reasoning through a thorough exposure to common logical
fallacies as these appear in ordinary language, and through a study of rational procedures for problem-solving. Students have
opportunities for extensive practice at discovering and overcoming their own logical faults in writing and speech as well as
practice at rational problem-solving.

END

PHIL 09120:

This basic course in the methods of philosophical inquiry investigates how these methods have been applied to selected
philosophical issues by classical and contemporary philosophers.

Introduction To Philosophy

END

Introduction To Philosophy - WI

PHIL 09121:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

Same as PHIL09.120, but meets general education writing intensive guidelines with a variety of graded and ungraded
writing assignments.

END

Introduction to Symbolic Logic

PHIL 09130:

This course offers the student a basic understanding of formal logic, which uses artificial languages to distinguish good
reasoning and good arguments from bad ones. Topics covered include validity, soundness, consistency, truth tables, natural
deduction proofs, artificial languages, and quantification.

END

Introduction to Ethics

PHIL 09150:

This historically structured course emphasizes both the nature of moral problems and the variety and adequacy of selected
moral theories. The course involves reflection and analysis of classic and contemporary theories and thinkers. This course
carries a mutual exclusion with the following courses; you may not enroll in it if you have completed any of the following
with a passing grade: PHIL 09151

END

Introduction to Ethics - WI

PHIL 09151:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This historically structured course emphasizes both the nature of moral problems and the variety and adequacy of selected
moral theories. The course involves reflection and analysis of classic and contemporary theories and thinkers. This course
meets general education writing intensive guidelines with a variety of graded and ungraded writing assignments.This course
carries a mutual exclusion with the following courses; you may not enroll in it if you have completed any of the following
with a passing grade: PHIL 09150

END

Philosophy of Religion

PHIL 09200:

This course addresses philosophical questions concerning a traditional conception of God. These questions include: What
is the nature of God? What is the relationship between God and morality? Is there any reason to believe in the existence of
God? Is there any reason to deny the existence of God? What is faith? Should belief in the existence of God be a matter of
faith?

END

Ancient Philosophy - WI

PHIL 09211:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course addresses questions about the nature of reality, and the nature and possibility of knowledge, through
examination of selected texts by western and non-western philosophers from the ancient, medieval and renaissance periods.

END

Modern Philosophy - WI

PHIL 09213:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course addresses questions about the nature of reality, and the nature and possibility of knowledge, through the
examination of selected texts by western and non-western philosophers from the modern and contemporary period.

END

Environmental Ethics

PHIL 09218:

This is a multidisciplinary course that addresses ethical issues and concerns regarding the environment; the relationships
between the individual, society and the natural environment; the importance of common attitudes and prevailing
world-views for understanding and responding to environmental challenges; and the need for changes in those attitudes and
world-views. Students will be encouraged to think about the profound ethical, political, economic, religious, scientific, and
technological implications of these environmental challenges.

END

Existentialism

PHIL 09219:

This course offers an introduction to Existentialism, a global philosophical movement with roots in the 19th Century.
Some existentialist themes include: freedom, authenticity, responsibility, death, choice, truth, and the nature of morality
and values. We will also explore philosophical and literary existential writings in the context of social and political issues
such as race, feminism, and postcoloniality.

END

PHIL 09222:

This course considers issues of human values in management, the relevance of ethical norms for management decisions and
the relationship between business and society. Case studies of corporations are utilized to illustrate and clarify these issues.

Business Ethics

END

American Philosophy

PHIL 09228:

This course examines the thought of selected American philosophers from the colonial period to the present. It stresses
the distinctive American philosophical movement, Pragmatism, and some of its representative figures such as Charles
Sanders Peirce, William James and John Dewey.

END

Asian Thought

PHIL 09231:

This course introduces the key philosophical concepts in the traditions of Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism and
Daoism. The course studies important thinkers and their concepts in these traditions to discover how they used these
concepts in their own systems of thought and what they contributed to later developments of the concepts. The
philosophical perspectives the course surveys involve metaphysics, ethics, epistemology, aesthetics, philosophy of mind,
philosophy of language, philosophy of religion, and social-political philosophy, characterizing some different ways of
thinking from, and supplementing, Western philosophy.

END

Social and Political Philosophy

PHIL 09240:

This is an introduction to the broad themes of political philosophy and social theory: How human life is and should be
organized into societies; the nature of political systems and different forms of government; the relationship between the
individual and the state; the nature of justice; the influence of economy on society; how human nature influences social
nature; and the meanings of freedom, equality, and democracy.

END

Social and Political Philosophy - WI

PHIL 09241:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This is an introduction to the broad themes of political philosophy and social theory: How human life is and should be
organized into societies; the nature of political systems and different forms of government; the relationship between the
individual and the state; the nature of justice; the influence of economy on society; how human nature influences social
nature; and the meanings of freedom, equality, and democracy. Meets Rowan Core writing intensive guidelines with a
variety of graded and ungraded writing assignments and papers.

END

Philosophical Perspectives on Science-WI

PHIL 09261:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or ENGR 01102

This course offers the student a basic understanding of some of the philosophical issues involved in modern science. The
nature of scientific explanation and prediction, the character of scientific change, the structure and function of scientific
theories, and the confirmation of scientific hypothesis are among the issues treated. Furthermore, attention is given to
epistemological issues arising from the social structure of science, such as whether science is neutral or biased with respect
to questions about gender, race, and religion. This course meets general education writing intensive guidelines with a variety
of graded and ungraded writing assignments.

END

Aesthetics

PHIL 09310:

Prerequisites: At least one PHIL course, or more than one Arts course (ART, ARHS, MUS, MUSG, THD, RTF).

This course offers students an approach to such philosophical issues as the nature; the role of the arts in human culture;
and the articulation of criteria for interpretation and criticism. Students will refine their own approach to these issues by
attending to specific works of poetry, fiction, drama, music, painting, sculpture, and other arts, including student works.

END

Aesthetics - WI

PHIL 09311:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 AND at least on PHIL course, or more than one Arts course, (ART, MUS, MUSG, THD, RTF) and
COMP 01112

Same as PHIL09.310, but meets general education writing intensive guidelines with a variety of graded and ungraded
writing assignments.

END

Philosophy of Law

PHIL 09324:

Prerequisites: At least one PHIL course

This course will explore the philosophical foundations of law and its practice. Topics may include the nature of law and its
relation to morality, rights, responsibility, and privacy; the nature of legal interpretation; theories of punishment; civil
disobedience; the ethics of lawyers.

END

Philosophy of Mind

PHIL 09326:

Prerequisites: Any PHIL course

This course addresses philosophical questions about the nature of the mind. Some of these questions include: What is the
relationship between the mind and the body? Can science fully understand the mind? Are minds like computers? What type
of minds do non-human animals have? Students will learn the responses of classical and contemporary philosophers to these
questions. Students will also develop and refine their own views in response to these questions.

END

Philosophy and Race - WI

PHIL 09327:

Prerequisites: At least one PHIL course

This course will explore philosophical issues related to “race,” including the role of modern European philosophers in the
development of the concept of ‘race’ and historical and contemporary critical examinations of ‘race’ and racism.

END

Philosophy And Gender

PHIL 09328:

Prerequisites: At least one PHIL course or PHRE course or INTR 01130

This course will explore philosophical issues relating to gender as considered by classical, modern and contemporary
philosophers. Recent work by feminist philosophers will be emphasized.

END

Philosophy And Gender - WI

PHIL 09329:

Prerequisite: At least one PHIL course or PHRE course or INTR 01130 and COMP 01112

This course will explore philosophical issues relating to gender as considered by classical, modern and contemporary
philosophers. Recent work by feminist philosophers will be emphasized. Meets general education writing intensive
guidelines with a variety of graded and ungraded writing assignments.

END

Biomedical Ethics-WI

PHIL 09341:

Prerequisites: At least one PHIL course and COMP 01112 or Permission from Instructor

Ethical issues in health care, medicine and bio-technology; for example, abortion, termination of treatment, euthanasia,
truth-telling and confidentiality, medical experimentation and informed consent, genetics, transplant surgery, artificial
reproductive techniques, the allocation of medical resources and the impact of race, class and gender as they relate to
biomedical issues.

END

Feminist Ethics - WI

PHIL 09346:

Prerequisite: At least one PHIL course and COMP 01112

Examines the central currents of feminist ethics, such as ethics of care and justice, abortion, parenting, social ethics,
violence, eating disorders and embodiment, prostitution, medical and reproductive ethics, aging, disability, theological
ethics.

END

Philosophy Of Science

PHIL 09368:

Prerequisites: 1 PHIL or PHRE course

This course offers the student a basic understanding of some of the philosophical issues involved in modern science. The
nature of scientific explanation and prediction, the character of scientific change, the structure and function of scientific
theories, and the confirmation of scientific hypothesis are among the issues treated. Furthermore, attention is given to
epistemological issues arising from the social structure of science, such as whether science is neutral or biased with respect
to questions about gender, race, and religion.

END

Epistemology

PHIL 09370:

Prerequisites: At least one course in PHIL or PHRE

This course addresses philosophical questions concerning the nature of knowledge. Some of these questions include: How
can we be sure that our knowledge of the world is accurate? What is the relation of evidence to our understanding of the
world? What distinguishes mathematical knowledge from scientific and ethical knowledge? Students will study and criticize
both traditional and contemporary approaches to the understanding of knowledge. Students will also develop and refine
their own views in response to these issues.

END

Epistemology - WI

PHIL 09371:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201 and at least one course in PHIL or PHRE

This course addresses philosophical questions concerning the nature of knowledge. Some of these questions include: How
can we be sure that our knowledge of the world is accurate? What is the relation of evidence to our understanding of the
world? What distinguishes mathematical knowledge from scientific and ethical knowledge? Students will study and criticize
both traditional and contemporary approaches to the understanding of knowledge. Students will also develop and refine
their own views in response to these issues. Meets general education writing intensive guidelines with a variety of graded and
ungraded writing assignments.

END

Philosophy Of Medicine - WI

PHIL 09376:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course addresses philosophical and methodological questions about medicine. Through a study of historical and
contemporary medical practice and theory, this course examines the epistemological and institutional commitments of
medicine. Some of the topics covered in the course are the nature of illness and health, epidemiology, drug testing, physician
error, the relation of western and non-western approaches to healing, and the role of gender and race in medicine. The goal
of the course is to develop a critically informed approach to the research and practical problems of medicine. This course
meets general education writing intensive guidelines with a variety of graded and ungraded writing assignments.

END

Intermediate Symbolic Logic

PHIL 09380:

Prerequisites: PHIL 09130

This intermediate course in symbolic logic studies both sentential and quantificational techniques as well as the
completeness and consistency of formal systems. The following topics are covered: formal proof methods for quanitifiers,
first order set theory, mathematical induction. numerical quantification, proofs in transfinite mathematics. proofs of
completeness and incompleteness.

END

Contemporary Moral Problems

PHIL 09392:

Prerequisite: At least one PHIL Course or PHRE course

This course covers recent work in applying moral theories to such issues as the environment, free speech, terrorism and
war, animal ethics, technology, and human rights and to such professions as healthcare, business, law, and government.

END

Contemporary Moral Problems- WI

PHIL 09393:

Prerequisites: At least one PHIL course or PHRE course and COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

This course covers recent work in applying moral theories to such issues as the environment, free speech, terrorism and
war, animal ethics, technology, and human rights and to such professions as healthcare, business, law, and governments.
Meets Rowan University writing intensive guidelines with a variety of graded and ungraded writing assignments

END

Topics In Philosophy

PHIL 09440:

At least one Philosophy (PHIL) or Philosophy and World Religions (PHRE) course.
This course offers advanced study in a particular topical area of philosophy. Topic varies. May not be offered every
semester. May be taken more than once.

END

Topics in the History of Philosophy

PHIL 09472:

Prerequisites: 1 PHIL or PHRE course

This course offers in-depth study of an important philosopher, movement or school in the history of philosophy. Topics
will vary, and students may take the course more than once if the topic is different.

END

PHIL 09490:

Independent Study

END

Senior Seminar in Philosophy

PHIL 09495:

Prerequisites: 4 PHIL courses and COMP 01112

This capstone course engages students in advanced level work in philosophy, by focusing on a particular topic of the
instructor's choice. Students must complete individual research projects.

END

Buddhism

PHRE 11310:

Prerequisites: Any one PHIL or REL or PHRE course

This course examines the central teachings and practices of Buddhism, from its Indian origins and East Asian development
to its interactions with the modern West. Instructional methods include observation of Buddhist practice as well as study of
Buddhist scriptures.

END

Daoism

PHRE 11330:

Prerequisites: Any one PHIL or REL or PHRE course

This course examines the central teachings and practices of Daoism, from its early founders Laozi and Zhuangzi to its
interactions with the modern West. Instructional methods include observations of Daoist practice as well as study of Daoist
scriptures.

END

Ethics in and out of Religions

PHRE 11361:

Prerequisites: One PHIL course OR One REL course OR One PHRE course

This course examines ethical issues and perspectives raised by particular religions, and how religious moral perspectives
influence our understanding of moral theories and dilemmas both within religious traditions and outside them including
secular moral philosophers. The course analyzes questions raised by the intersection of ethics and religion with some
attention to practical issues and different approaches to ethics. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Topics in Philosophy and World Religions

PHRE 11440:

Prerequisites: Prior completion of 1 PHIL, PHRE, OR REL course

This course offers in-depth study of a topic at the intersection between Philosophy and World Religions. Topics will vary,
and students may take the course more than once if the topic is different.

END

REL 10100:

This course surveys the major world religions in both the Eastern and Western traditions. The course replaces REL 10200
RELIGIONS OF THE WORLD. It is not permitted to earn credit in both.

World Religions

END

Religion on Film

REL 10150:

This course will explore several world religions, and religious studies as a field, through watching movies that deal with
religion or that may be interpreted in light of religion. Through the lens of these films, students will question how and why
moviemakers choose to address religious themes: What is religion? What makes a film “religious”? How do films “mark”
religious content? How do films that deal with religion shape our ideas about religion in general and about specific religions?
How do our own faith traditions shape what messages we take away from movies?

END

REL 10210:

This course explores the wide variety of religious movements that have existed and continue to exist in America. Both
traditional religions and cults are considered within the context of American culture.

Religion In America

END

REL 10214:

This course will offer you the opportunity to explore the beliefs, literature, ethics and social implications of Judaism,
Roman Catholicism, Orthodoxy, Protestantism, Islam and other religions as time permits.

Religions Of The Western World

END

REL 10219:

This course explores phenomena of religions in terms of broad perspectives such as historical, sociological, ethnographical,
cultural, and psychological ones, with an emphasis on learning various approaches and methodologies in religion studies.

Approaches to Religion

END

Religions Of Asia

REL 10230:

This course introduces students to major religions in Asia: Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism and Shinto. It
focuses on the historical contexts, central teachings and traditional practices of these religions and their dynamic relations
with societies and cultures. Instructional methods include observation of religious practice as well as study of religious
scriptures.

END

REL 10240:

This course acquaints students with the Bible by a study of its books with the aid of the findings of archeology, literary
criticism and other related fields.

Introduction To The Bible

END

Judaism

REL 10301:

This course examines the primary beliefs, texts, and spiritual approaches of the Jewish religious tradition. Covering
approximately 3,000 years, this tradition has undergone many changes as the conditions of Jewish life changed. Students will
study primary texts such as biblical accounts and commentaries along with contemporary personal reflections.

END

Christianity

REL 10320:

This course will examine the history, texts, worldview, and contemporary issues of the Christian religious tradition.
Spanning two thousand years, the Christian tradition has undergone many changes as it had evolved in the world. Students
will study basic texts and historical events while also reflecting on contemporary issues.

END

REL 10328:

This course emphasizes the contributions to the Western, and more specifically the Christian, tradition of such figures as
Augustine, Aquinas, Luther, Kierkegaard, Tillich and Barth.

Development Of Western Religious Thought

END

REL 10331:

This course will challenge students to understand the different attitudes toward the natural world taken by many different
religious traditions as well the ways spiritual approaches to nature are sometimes constructed by American culture.

Spirituality and Nature

END

Sex and the Bible

REL 10335:

In this course, students will gain an increased familiarity with the Bible, both as a historical document and a source of
influence on the past several millennia of Western culture. We will apply conceptual textual-critical frameworks for material
presented in class in order to determine how these biblical texts have been and continue to be deployed in culture, explore
the process of translation by examining and creating interpretations, considering carefully the elements involved, and
evaluate the diversity of biblical perspectives on various topics relating to sex, sexuality, gender, bodies, family, crime, and
society.

END

REL 10340:

This course examines one topic in religion in depth. Its topic may vary. This course may not be offered annually.

Topics in World Religions

END

Spirituality And Healing

REL 10350:

This course examines the health and healing issues from a cross-cultural perspective. It investigates how different religious
traditions interpret and assign meanings to sickness and disease, how they address matters of suffering and affliction, and
how they practice healing and therapy. It explores the role and place of spiritual healing in the modern scientific age, and its
implications for contemporary health care system and policies.

END

Senior Seminar in World Religions

REL 10450:

Prerequisites: 4 REL or PHRE (12 s.h) courses

This capstone course engages students in advanced level work in different disciplinary approaches to the studies of world
religions, by focusing on a particular topic of the instructor's choice. Students must complete individual research projects.

END

Introductory Astronomy: Stars & Galaxies

ASTR 11100:

This course focuses on the large-scale structures of the universe including stars, star clusters, nebulas, galaxies, and
cosmology. To provide a well-rounded introduction to astronomy, additional topics include the nature of light, telescopes,
and historical and modern observational perspectives. This course requires night viewing outside of class time.

END

Introduction To Astronomy (Lecture And Lab)

ASTR 11120:

This course is a descriptive study of the universe that emphasizes the physical concepts that explain astronomical
phenomena. The evolutionary, structural, and dynamical aspects of the solar system, stars, nebulae, galaxies, and the entire
universe are discussed. The laboratory experience has both quantitative and qualitative components that include outdoor
observations of night sky objects, daytime solar observations, and computer simulations. There is occasional evening viewing
outside of class.

END

Introductory Astronomy: Solar System & Exoplanets

ASTR 11200:

Prerequisites: Score of at least 60 on CLM or MATH 01122 Minimum Grade of D- or MATH 01122 Minimum Grade of D- (may be
Taken Concurrently) or MATH 01140 Minimum Grade of D- (may be taken concurrently)

In the study of planetary science, the students will explore geology, chemistry, physics and astronomy in their applications
to the composition, dynamics, atmospheres, surfaces, and magnetospheres of objects within the solar system. The search for
life or conditions suitable for life in other parts of the solar system is a driving force of solar system exploration., thus biology
is incorporated as well. This course will help the student develop skills necessary to discuss and write about science.

END

Introductory Astrophysics

ASTR 11230:

Prerequisites: MATH 01130 OR MATH 01140

This course is an overview of astrophysics, the application of the laws of physics to interpret astronomical phenomena.
Topics include the Sun, star formation, properties of stars, stellar structure and evolution, supernovae, white dwarfs,
neutron stars, black holes, the Milky Way galaxy, the interstellar medium, normal galaxies, active galaxies, quasars, and
cosmology.

END

Observational Astronomy

ASTR 11240:

Prerequisites: ASTR 11230 AND MATH 01130

This course is a survey of current methods in observational astronomy. Topics include, but are not limited to, celestial
coordinates, celestial navigation, the magnitude system, modern telescopes, CCD cameras, astronomical data, imaging
software, solar observing, and planetarium operation. This course will familiarize students with the operation of a 0.4-meter
telescope. Nighttime observational projects and oral presentations are part of the course.

END

Astronomy Research I

ASTR 11250:

Prerequisites: minimum 3.0 GPA within major/minorAND permission of instructor

This course introduces and/or develops modern research techniques used in astronomy. Research is performed in
collaboration with one or more faculty in an area of specialization of the faculty. Emphasis will be placed on developing
research skills, developing technical writing skills, and the development of skills needed for scientific presentations.

END

Astronomy Research II

ASTR 11251:

Prerequisites: minimum 3.0 GPA within major/minorAND permission of instructor

This course introduces and/or develops modern research techniques used in astronomy. Research is performed in
collaboration with one or more faculty in an area of specialization of the faculty. Emphasis will be placed on developing
research skills, developing technical writing skills, and the development of skills needed for scientific presentations.

END

Planetary Astronomy

ASTR 11301:

Prerequisites: ASTR 11230 and PHYS 00222

The science of planetary systems, both solar and extra-solar, is examined. Topics include planet formation, radioactive
dating, small-body dynamics, interactions of radiation with matter, tides, planetary interiors, atmospheres, and
magnetospheres.

END

ASTR 11302:

Stellar Astrophysics

Prerequisites: ASTR 11230 and PHYS 00222

This course presents the properties, structure, formation, evolution, and deaths of stars. The physics of stellar atmospheres
and stellar spectroscopy is presented, and the development of the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram is examined. The theory of
stellar structure is detailed including the process of stellar nucleosynthesis. Degenerate matter and the structure of collapsed
stars are described. Other topics include: stellar pulsation, close binary systems, accretion, novae, supernovae, pulsars, black
holes, and star clusters.

END

Galactic Astronomy And Cosmology

ASTR 11303:

Prerequisites(s): ASTR 11230 and PHYS 00222

The structure, kinematics, formation, and evolution of the Milky Way Galaxy and other galaxies are studied. Elements of
general relativity are introduced as the physics of supermassive black holes and active galaxies are examined. This course
covers relativistic (Big Bang) cosmology, the large-scale structure of the Universe, the expansion history and fate of the
Universe, and current estimates of the age of the Universe. Observations that measure the matter and energy content of the
Universe are presented. Cosmic inflation, primordial nucleosynthesis, the Cosmic Microwave Background, and the Hubble
flow are covered in depth.

END

Astronomy Research III

ASTR 11350:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 AND minimum 3.0 GPAwithin major/minor AND permission of instructor

This course introduces and/or develops modern research techniques used in astronomy. Research is performed in
collaboration with one or more faculty in an area of specialization of the faculty. Emphasis will be placed on developing
research skills, developing technical writing skills, and the development of skills needed for scientific presentations.

END

Astronomy Research IV

ASTR 11450:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 AND minimum 3.0 GPAwithin major/minor AND permission of instructor

This course introduces and/or develops modern research techniques used in astronomy. Research is performed in
collaboration with one or more faculty in an area of specialization of the faculty. Emphasis will be placed on developing
research skills, developing technical writing skills, and the development of skills needed for scientific presentations.

END

Principles Of Physical Science

PHSC 01110:

This course provides experiences and information that will develop a better understanding of the function and significance
of science in today's world. It emphasizes the general principles of physics and stresses their influences in the development
of all the physical sciences.

END

Independent Study (Physical Sciences)

PHSC 01310:

Prerequisites: permission of instructor.

Students who enter the independent study program working under the supervision of a faculty member are required to
identify and select an appropriate project area, develop an achievable plan, execute the project and prepare a presentation of
the completed study.

END

Selected Topics In Physics

PHYS 00120:

The content of this course varies to reflect the role of physics in society. A limited number of topics are selected from
among the following: mechanics, thermodynamics, sound, light and optics, electricity and magnetism, electric circuits,
modern physics or the investigation of the physics of applied technologies. It studies the fundamental principles underlying
the topics and considers connections to the physical and social environment.

END

Building Momentum as a Physics Student at Rowan and Beyond-RS

PHYS 00130:

Prerequisites: Major restriction: BA in Physics, BS in Physics, BS in Biophysics

This course will familiarize students with foundational topics in physics and biophysics, basic resources available, and skills
needed for success as a student at Rowan University. Introductory topics in scientific study will be addressed including the
scientific method, navigation of the scientific literature, and tips for scientific writing and presentation. The curriculum for
each program and guidance on planning an appropriate academic path will be provided and discussed. Information on career
postgraduate education paths available to graduates will be given to inform this planning, including specifics on Certificates
of Undergraduate Studies, minors, concentrations, and dual-degree programs that may facilitate success for students in their
future beyond Rowan. The course will also involve workshops and professional development exercises to help students build
their critical professional skills (i.e. personal presentation, networking, self-assessment of skills, etc.).

END

Physics Of Current Technologies (Lecture and Lab)

PHYS 00140:

This course introduces contemporary concepts of physics through their application in commercially available technologies.
The course mostly focuses on information storage technologies but actual course content evolves to reflect the specialties of
the instructor. Concepts such as electrical resistance, magnetic fields, magnetic domains, electron tunneling, and assorted
microscopic techniques will be introduced.

END

Physics Of Everyday Life (Lecture and Lab)

PHYS 00150:

The goal of this course is to expose students with a non-science background to physics. The students will experience the
excitement of physics by examining phenomena of our everyday environment. The historical development of such ideas will
be studied as well. Topics selected for study include mechanics, matter, heat, sound, light, electricity, magnetism, atomic
and nuclear physics. Physics will be communicated in a conceptual framework along with straightforward algebraic and
trigonometric formulations.

END

Physics Of Sound And Music (Lecture And Lab)

PHYS 00175:

The goal of this course is to expose students to physics through its application to sound and music. The students will study
these applications by examining the phenomena of voice, sound, hearing, musical instruments, acoustics, electronic
technology and reproduction of sound and music. The historical development of such topics will be studied as well.

END

Physics I Without Calculus (Lecture and Lab)

PHYS 00210:

Prerequisites: Score of at least 60 on CLM OR MATH 01122 OR MATH 01130 with concurrent registration allowed OR MATH
01140 with concurrent registration allowed

This course studies the principles of mechanics, heat, and fluids. Calculus is not used. The course emphasizes problem
work involving the use of algebra, trigonometry, and geometry.

END

Physics II Without Calculus (Lecture and Lab)

PHYS 00211:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00210 or PHYS 00220

This course studies the basic principles of electricity, magnetism, and light. Calculus is not used. The course emphasizes
problem work involving the use of algebra, trigonometry, and geometry.

END

Introductory Mechanics (Lecture and Lab)

PHYS 00220:

Prerequisites: MATH 01130 or Math 01140

This course studies the basic principles or mechanics and is equivalent to most calculus-based introductory mechanics
courses often entitled Physics I. The course is designed to cover introductory mechanics (Newton's laws, energy and
momentum conservation, rotating systems, statics, gravity and simple harmonic motion) at a level appropriate for future
scientists and engineers. The course includes a laboratory component and it emphasizes problem-solving techniques.

END

Introductory Thermodynamics, Fluids, Waves, & Optics (Lecture and Lab)

PHYS 00221:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00220 Corequisite: MATH 01131 or MATH 01141

This introductory course studies the basic principles of thermodynamics, fluids, waves, and optics and their application.
The concepts will be applied through problem solving and laboratory experiences. A large portion of the content of this
course builds from the concept of conservation of energy covered in the introductory mechanics course. The course is
required for physics majors and recommended for those majoring in biochemistry, chemistry, biology, engineering, or
mathematics. The specific topics covered include elastic properties of materials, fluid mechanics, mechanical waves, sound,
conduction of heat, kinetic theory of gases, the laws of thermodynamics, light, geometric optics, interference and
diffraction.

END

Introductory Electricity & Magnetism (Lecture and Lab)

PHYS 00222:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00220 Corequisite: MATH 01131 or MATH 01141

This course studies the basic principles of electricity and magnetism and is equivalent to most calculus-based introductory
electricity and magnetism courses often entitled Physics II. The course is designed to cover introductory electricity and
magnetism (charge, current, potential, fields, AC and DC circuits, Maxwell's Equations, and electromagnetic waves) at a
level appropriate for future scientists and engineers. The course includes a laboratory component and it emphasizes
problem-solving techniques.

END

Physics Research I

PHYS 00250:

Prerequisites: Minimum 3.0 GPA within major/minor AND permission of instructor.

This course introduces and/or develops modern research techniques used in physics. Research is performed in
collaboration with one or more faculty in an area of specialization of the faculty. Emphasis will be placed on developing
research skills, developing technical writing skills, and the development of skills needed for scientific presentations.

END

Physics Research II

PHYS 00251:

Prerequisites: Minimum 3.0 GPA within major/minor AND permission of instructor.

This course introduces and/or develops modern research techniques used in physics. Research is performed in
collaboration with one or more faculty in an area of specialization of the faculty. Emphasis will be placed on developing
research skills, developing technical writing skills, and the development of skills needed for scientific presentations.

END

PHYS 00300:

Modern Physics (Lecture and Lab)

Prerequisites: (MATH 01131 or MATH 01141) AND(PHYS 00211 or PHYS 00222)

This course covers modern physics developed since the turn of the 20th century. After a review of some classical physics,
course topics include special relativity, wave and particle aspects of radiation, matter waves, models of the atom, ionization,
spectra, x-rays, and introductory quantum theory. It also covers theories developed by Planck, Einstein, Rutherford, Bragg,
Bohr, Compton, de Broglie, Pauli, Schrodinger and Heisenberg.

END

PHYS 00310:

Analytical Mechanics

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 AND MATH 01230

This course teaches students Newtonian, Lagrangian, and Hamiltonian formulations of mechanics, and their applications
to such problems as central force motion, linear and nonlinear oscillations, collisions between particles, noninertial systems,
coupled oscillations and normal coordinates, and rigid bodies.

END

Instrumentation for Biomedical Sciences

PHYS 00315:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 or BMS 02230

The design and use of advanced instrumentation are critical in all areas of the biomedical sciences for analysis of
biomedical systems and for synthesis of new biomedical technologies. This course will familiarize students with a wide range
of the instrumentation they are likely to encounter in a biomedical career. Various instruments will be examined with
respect to: (1) theoretical basis of the measurement or synthesis and relation to instrumentational architecture, (2)
implementation of the method and experimental design, and (3) data interpretation and analysis. The course will integrate
primary scientific literature and discuss the evolution of instrumentation with new technologies and/or applications. The
course will include inspection of instruments and observation of experimental execution, providing students with
experience over a broad range of modern biomedical instrumentation.

END

Electricity & Magnetism I

PHYS 00320:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 AND MATH 01230

This course studies classical electromagnetism. Its topics include: the laws of electromagnetic force, Maxwell's equations,
electromagnetic induction, interaction of currents, and electromagnetic energy and waves.

END

Electricity & Magnetism II

PHYS 00321:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00320

This course studies advanced applications of Maxwell's equations. For example, the generation of electromagnetic
radiation and its propagation through matter will be discussed. The connection between Maxwell's Equations and the
Special Theory of Relativity will be emphasized.

END

Electric Circuits (Lecture and Lab)

PHYS 00325:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00222 and MATH 01230

This course provides a lab-intensive introduction to electronic circuit design, construction, and troubleshooting,
developing many of the analytical and laboratory skills needed to work with circuits commonly encountered in experimental
physics research. Although the emphasis is on analog circuits, elementary digital circuits will be studied as time permits. A
required final project integrates elements learned throughout the term.

END

PHYS 00330:

Mathematical Methods for Physics

Prerequisites: MATH 01230 Corequisites: PHYS 00300 (Concurrent enrollment allowed)

This course studies mathematical topics as they apply to physics: complex numbers, determinants and matrices, Fourier
series, as well as ordinary and partial differentiation. Certain more advanced topics may be treated: calculus of variations,
gamma and beta functions, coordinate transformations, tensor analysis, functions of complex variable, Legendre
polynomials, and Bessel functions. The course will include computational as well as analytical methods.

END

Optics & Light (Lecture and Lab)

PHYS 00340:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00211 and PHYS 00300 orpermission from the instructor to bypass PHYS 00300

This course studies the nature and propagation of light, dispersion, reflection and refraction at plane and spherical
surfaces, lenses (thin and thick), aberrations of lenses and mirrors, optical instruments, polarization, diffraction, and
photometry. It also discusses modern developments and techniques (such as fiber optics, lasers, holography).

END

Introduction to Optical Design

PHYS 00345:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00222 and MATH 01230

This course is intended to give an introduction to the fundamentals of optical design, including geometric optics, matrix
theory, and aberration theory. Students will become proficient at utilizing merit functions and solve within an
industry-standard optical design software, in order to conceptualize, design, optimize, and analyze optical systems. This
course will also cover an overview of traditional lens designs such as landscape lenses, periscopic lenses, and ocular lenses
(eyepieces). It will also include selected advanced designs such as telescopes and spectrographs. Due to the lab nature of this
course and the subject material, students will need to have access to a laptop on which they can install the design software
and bring with them to class to complete course lab work.

END

Laser Physics

PHYS 00347:

Prerequisite: PHYS 00340

This course is intended to give an introduction to the fundamentals of laser physics as well as a practical understanding of
common laser designs and applications. Students will develop an understanding of the quantum nature of light and its
interaction with matter and how these interactions can be manipulated to produce both pulsed and continuous-wave lasers,
as well as their unique characteristics such as coherence, monochromaticity, and Gaussian beams. Students will get an
overview of the pros and cons of various gas, solid-state, and diode lasers.

END

Physics Research III

PHYS 00350:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 AND minimum 3.0 GPAwithin major/minor AND permission of instructor

This course introduces and/or develops modern research techniques used in physics. Research is performed in
collaboration with one or more faculty in an area of specialization of the faculty. Emphasis will be placed on developing
research skills, developing technical writing skills, and the development of skills needed for scientific presentations.

END

Physics Research Methods I

PHYS 00351:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 and BS Physics Major with at least 60 s.h. completed and 2.5 GPA in PHYS 00220, PHYS 00221 and
PHYS 00222

This course introduces students to contemporary research problems in Physics or Astronomy. Students will participate
and learn the skills associated with experimental, theoretical, and computational problems in physics. Development of
technical writing skills and scientific presentation skills will be emphasized.

END

Physics Research Methods II

PHYS 00352:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00351

This course is a continuation of PHYS 00351 Physics Research I and introduces students to contemporary research
problems in Physics. Research creativity and skills are expected to be significantly more refined in this course in comparison
to the first course in the sequence.

END

Molecular Biophysics

PHYS 00360:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 OR MCB 01102

This course is aimed at understanding the physics of biological systems. The goal of the course is to quantitatively define
biological systems and their functions. Key emphasis will be placed on (1) understanding theories, laws, and axioms that
govern systems and their behavior and (2) the use of physics to determine quantitative information about systems and their
behaviors. For each topic, the basic laws of physics will be reviewed followed by their application to specific biomolecular
and biological system examples. the laboratory component is aimed at giving students hands-on experience in measurement
and observation for biological systems.

END

Physics Learning Assistant For Introductory Mechanics

PHYS 00361:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00220 or PHYS 00210; and 3.0 minimum GPA in introductory physics coursesand permission of instructor

This upper-level Physics course is designed to provide students with experience in solving laboratory problems and
broaden their knowledge of basic physics. Students will gain this experience by 1) providing assistance to student groups
during the laboratory activity, 2) preparing materials for laboratory activities, and 3) developing new laboratory activities.
This course is recommended for all Physics students since it improves their depth of knowledge of physics while enhancing
their communication skills. This specific course is geared toward the area of mechanics.

END

PHYS 00362:

Physics Learning Assistant For Introductory Thermodynamics, Fluids, Waves, And Optics

Prerequisites: PHYS 00221 Modern Physics; 3.0 minimum GPA in introductory physics courses and permission of instructor.

This upper-level Physics course is designed to provide students with experience in solving laboratory problems and
broaden their knowledge of basic physics. Students will gain this experience by 1) providing assistance to student groups
during the laboratory activity, 2) preparing materials for laboratory activities, and 3) developing new laboratory activities.
This course is recommended for all Physics students since it improves their depth of knowledge of physics while enhancing
their communication skills. This specific course is geared toward the areas of thermodynamics, fluids, waves, and optics.

END

Physics Learning Assistant For Introductory Electricity And Magnetism

PHYS 00363:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00222 or PHYS 00211; 3.0 minimum GPA in introductory physics courses and permission of instructor

This upper-level Physics course is designed to provide students with experience in solving laboratory problems and
broaden their knowledge of basic physics. Students will gain this experience by 1) providing assistance to student groups
during the laboratory activity, 2) preparing materials for laboratory activities, and 3) developing new laboratory activities.
This course is recommended for all Physics students since it improves their depth of knowledge of physics while enhancing
their communication skills. This specific course is geared toward the areas of electricity and magnetism.

END

Biophysics: Fundamentals of Biomaterials

PHYS 00371:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 OR MATH 01235 OR MCB 01102

This course is aimed at applying material physics and technology to regulate and support biological systems and functions
A goal of the course is to fundamentally understand variable biomaterials and their interactions with biological systems
(cells, tissues, organs). A second goal is to use material physics and technology as a tool to understand biomaterials for
artificial tissues and organs, or biophysical devices and sensors. Finally, students will learn and understand public healthcare
policies, needs, and resources.

END

Introduction to Radiation Physics

PHYS 00375:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00360

This course is aimed at the understanding of radiation, more specifically, ionizing radiation. The goal of this course is to
understand the mechanisms, kinetics, behaviors of radiation and radioactive materials, and the fundamental properties of
particulate and electromagnetic radiations and their interactions with matter. The course will include demonstrations and
activities to show these interactions.

END

PHYS 00410:

Quantum Mechanics I

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 AND MATH 01230

This course will serve as an introduction to quantum mechanics. Students will learn the basic concepts of quantum
mechanics and how to solve simple problems using quantum mechanics. Topics selected for study include the origins of
quantum mechanics, the free particle in wave mechanics, particles in one-dimensional potentials, the axiomatic formulation
of quantum physics, particles in three-dimensions, spin, and the Pauli exclusion principle.

END

Quantum Mechanics II

PHYS 00411:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00410

This course is a continuation of Quantum Mechanics I. Students will learn more advanced concepts and problems in
quantum mechanics. Topics selected for study include the formalism of quantum mechanics, particles in three-dimensions,
spin and angular momentum, quantum statistical mechanics, time-independent perturbation theory, time-dependent
perturbation theory, and scattering. Some topics may overlap with the ones in Quantum Mechanics I, but are taught on a
higher level.

END

Statistical Physics

PHYS 00430:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00310 or PHYS 00320

The student will study in detail the laws of thermodynamics. The statistical derivation of these laws will be presented.
Topics include: ideal gases, classical and quantum distribution functions, phase transitions, and other special topics.

END

Advanced Laboratory (Lecture and Lab)

PHYS 00440:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300

This course introduces modern experimental techniques commonly used in physics. Experimental results will be correlated
with existing theories. Technical writing skills will be developed and evaluated.

END

Physics Research IV

PHYS 00450:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 and minimum 3.0 GPA within major/minor and permission of instructor

This course introduces and/or develops modern research techniques used in physics. Research is performed in
collaboration with one or more faculty in an area of specialization of the faculty. Emphasis will be placed on developing
research skills, developing technical writing skills, and the development of skills needed for scientific presentations.

END

Biophysics Research I

PHYS 00451:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00360 or PHYS 00371

This is the first course in a sequence of two courses providing meaningful research training for students majoring in
Biophysics. Student research teams will work on current research problems in the biophysics field. The specific research
problem will be developed and assigned by a research advisor. Student participants will develop a detailed knowledge of
measurement techniques and limitations while also gaining an in-depth understanding of a current research area in the
biophysics field. Students will be required to complete a literature search and review. Communication skills, both oral and
written, will be emphasized.

END

Biophysics Research II

PHYS 00452:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00451

This is the second course in a sequence of two courses providing meaningful research training for students majoring in
Biophysics. Student research teams will work on current research problems in the biophysics field. The specific research
problem will be developed and assigned by a research advisor. Student participants will develop a detailed knowledge of
measurement techniques and limitations while also gaining an in-depth understanding of a current research area in the
biophysics field. Students will be required to complete a literature search and review. Communication skills, both oral and
written, will be emphasized.

END

Selected Topics In Advanced Physics

PHYS 00470:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 and MATH 01230 or permission of instructor

This course is aimed to expose students to advanced physics topics that are important for their career development and
their involvement with faculty research. The topics include, but are not limited to, Solid State Physics, Atomic and
Molecular Physics, Occupational Physics, Special Relativity, and Elementary Particles. One topic from the above list will be
chosen each time the course is offered.

END

Radiation Physics

PHYS 00475:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 or ((BIOL 01201 or BIOL 01203) and PHYS 00211))

This course is a lecture course aimed at training students at understanding radiation and its role in measurement sciences,
imaging, spectroscopy, diffraction, and ionization of biomaterials. This course is useful for students planning a career in
biophysical sciences, health physics, or radiation physics. Radiation Physics will introduce students to x-ray, gamma, and
neutron instrumentation and techniques. Students will gain an understanding of the interaction of radiation with matter and
how radiation is used in imaging, measurement and for ionizing matter.

END

Radiation: Effects and Applications

PHYS 00477:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00375

This course is aimed at the understanding of radiation and its effects on various materials and the mechanics and kinetics
that can cause damage. The goal of this course is to investigate the stress that ionizing radiation applies to materials and the
subsequent applications which include medical use, radio-chemistry of water, energy transfer and dose, radio-pharmacy,
environmental radiation, and material characterization. The course will also investigate the regulations that govern the
beneficial use of radiation and radioactive materials.

END

Radiation Instrumentation

PHYS 00479:

Prerequisites: PHYS 00375

This course is aimed at training students at understanding radiation detection. This course is useful for students planning a
career in health physics or medical physics. Radiation Instrumentation will introduce students to: methods to detect
ionizing radiation using its effects, design and operation of various detectors, particle monitoring, particle detection
efficiency, personal dosimetry, and radiation shielding.

END

PHYS 00499:

Independent Study - Physics

END

American Economic Systems

ECON 04100:

Focuses on the fundamental ideology, mechanics, development, and contemporary state of American economic system
with reference to the global economy. Course is recommended for all students who want only a one semester course in
economics.

END

ECON 04101:

This course analyzes the overall level of economic activity in the United States and examines its major determinants, public
stabilization policies, economic growth and international trade.

An Introduction To Economics-A Macroeconomic Perspective

END

ECON 04102:

This course analyzes resource allocation among alternative uses. It studies consumer demand, product and factor price
determination, general equilibrium and optimal income distribution.

An Introduction To Economics-A Microeconomic Perspective

END

ECON 04200:

This course investigates the development of economic thought. It analyzes the significant contribution of philosophers
and economists from the works of Plato to those of Keynes.

History Of Economic Ideas

END

ECON 04205:

This course surveys the process of U.S. economic development to the present day. It analyzes the factors behind the
growth of the U.S. economy and the prospects for the future. This course may not be offered annually.

American Economic History

END

Environmental Economics

ECON 04210:

Prerequisites: ECON 04102

This course analyzes the economic causes and consequences of environmental deterioration and examines the relevant
public policies. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Current Economic Problems And Policies

ECON 04215:

Prerequisites: ECON 04101 and ECON 04102

This course explores current significant problems confronting the United States' economy. This course may not be offered
annually.

END

ECON 04225:

This course analyzes the economic roles of women in society and studies recent movements, policies and their
implementation.This course may not be offered annually.

Women In The Economy

END

Selected Topics In Economics

ECON 04269:

Prerequisites: ECON 04101 or ECON 04102

This course focuses on a detailed study of a selected topic in economics. Students should consult the instructor regarding
the course topic, methodology, and objectives. Any particular selected topic(s) may be offered once within a period of three
years.

END

Economic Statistics

ECON 04282:

Prerequisites: ECON 04101, ECON 04102 and STAT 02100 or STAT 02260

This course studies statistical decision-making, linear regression, correlation and the construction and use of index
numbers and time series through the explicit use of economic examples, illustrations and applications.

END

Statistics For Economists

ECON 04292:

Prerequisites: ECON 04101 and ECON 04102

This course is an introduction to the use of statistical concepts and their applications in economics. The course covers
areas such as probability, hypothesis testing, regression analysis, correlation, and time series. Students cannot receive credit
for both this class and Economic Statistics (ECON 04.282).

END

Intermediate Macroeconomics

ECON 04301:

Prerequisites: ECON 04101

This course analyzes in depth the factors determining the level of national income, employment, price levels and interest
rates.

END

ECON 04302:

Prerequisites: ECON 04102 AND (MATH 01130 OR MATH 01140 OR MATH 03125)

This course analyzes factor price determination, general equilibrium, capital theory and optimal income distribution.

Intermediate Microeconomics

END

Principles Of Economics: A Survey

ECON 04303:

This course analyzes the market system and alternative mechanisms for determining prices and allocating resources. Pure
competition, monopolistic competition, oligopoly and monopoly are examined. Additionally, the determinants of aggregate
employment and national income, money, banking, monetary policy, international trade and finance are analyzed. This
course is not available to economics majors.

END

Money And Banking

ECON 04305:

Prerequisites: ECON 04101

This course studies the operation of the money and banking system in the U.S. It stresses Federal Reserve control of
money supply and credit conditions to combat inflation and unemployment. It considers monetary arrangements and
problems among nations. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Economic Development M/G

ECON 04307:

Prerequisites: ECON 04101 and ECON 04102

This course studies the process of economic growth, the sources of increasing economic productivity, the resources for
investment and the proper allocation of resources. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Global Economics - M/G

ECON 04310:

Prerequisites: ECON 04101 and ECON 04102

This course studies the economic aspects of globalization taking place amongst countries through linkages of international
trade and commerce, foreign direct investment, short term capital flows, institutional lending, immigration, emigration,
knowledge, and technology. Emphasis will be placed on the economic processes and ramifications of globalization. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

Public Finance

ECON 04315:

Prerequisites: ECON 04101 and ECON 04102

This course investigates taxes and debts of government, its budgets and intergovernmental fiscal relationships and public
expenditure theory (cost-benefit analysis). This course may not be offered annually.

END

Contemporary Economic Systems M/G

ECON 04320:

Prerequisites: ECON 04101 and ECON 04102

This course analyzes theories, policies and practices of selected countries and methods of solving macroeconomic and
microeconomic problems. This course may not be offered annually.

END

International Trade

ECON 04325:

Prerequisites: ECON 04101 AND ECON 04102

This course will explore the economic causes and consequences of international trade. It will focus on models of
international trade; trade pattern determinants; gains from trade; trade’s impact on labor, poverty and environment;
immigration; foreign direct investment; trade policy formulation; tariffs, quotas, and other controls on trade; trade
agreements; technologies (such as blockchain); as well as the international institutions that guide our system of global trade.

END

Labor Economics

ECON 04345:

Prerequisites: ECON 04102

This course studies the development of the American trade union movement and its impact on wage levels and income
distribution. It examines the impact of trade unions on individual employers in the private and public sectors with the help
of simulation of contract negotiation. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Health Economics

ECON 04351:

Prerequisites: ECON 04101 and ECON 04102

An economic analysis of the health care industry and the roles of markets and government are examined. Topics to include
access to care, cost containment, the role of insurance, and the impact of information and technology.

END

Industrial Organization

ECON 04352:

Prerequisite: ECON 04102

Industrial organization is the study of industry and firm behavior. Using the basic tools of microeconomic theory this
course explores the relationships among firms in an industry or across industries by examining strategic interaction among
firms. In addition, the student will analyze the acquisition and use of market power by firms and examine the role of
government in setting industrial policy.

END

Law and Economics

ECON 04353:

Prerequisite: ECON 04102

The course applies microeconomic theory to issues in both civil and criminal law. The course studies the effect of legal
rules on the allocation of resources including property rights, liability and negligence, and the use of common law to correct
for market failure. Topics include introduction to legal institutions and an economic approach to legal analysis, contracts,
criminal and constitutional law and the economic efficiency of common law.

END

Urban Economics

ECON 04360:

Prerequisites: ECON 04102

This course analyzes the economic problems that are related to the urban crisis in America and examines the implications
of existing public policies for the resolution of the problems. Urban poverty and discrimination, housing and transportation
receive comprehensive treatment. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Sports Economics

ECON 04363:

Prerequisites: ECON 04102

This course utilizes microeconomic tools to analyze topics in professional and amateur sports. Topics include the
industrial organization of teams and leagues, the public finance of sports, sports labor markets, and amateur sports. Students
will be exposed to peer reviewed articles in order to develop a deeper understanding of microeconomics and statistical
analysis.

END

ECONOMETRICS

ECON 04392:

Prerequisites: ECON 04292 and MATH 03125 or MATH 01130; Minimum Grade of C- in All

Econometrics is the set of statistical techniques used to measure and analyze economic relationships, and to test these
predictions. This course will focus on statistical analysis and the interpretation of economic data. In addition, the course will
utilize data analysis and statistical modeling and apply economic methods to problems in economics.

END

The Economics Of Personal Financial Planning

ECON 04395:

Prerequisites: ECON 04101 and ECON 04102

This course examines the process of developing and implementing long-range plans to achieve financial objectives. Studies
personal and family resources, how people spend, save, protect and invest their money, concepts of budgeting, cash
management, borrowing, tax management, risk management, investments, retirement planning, and estate planning receive
particular attention.

END

Internship In Economics

ECON 04410:

This course provides practical experience for the economics major. The student is placed in supervised settings in business,
government or other organizations. Interns will develop their skills in applying various economic theories, principles and/or
concepts to assigned real world problems. The faculty in the Economics Department will closely supervise, monitor, and
evaluate the learning experience.

END

Seminar In Economics Wi

ECON 04492:

Corequisites: ECON 04301. Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and (ECON 04302 or ECON 04301) and ECON 04392 or (STAT 02260 and
ECON 04392)

This course develops the interrelationships of various theoretical and applied areas within the study of economics through
the techniques of research design.

END

ECON 04495:

Independent Study-Economics

END

Public Administration

EDPA 02320:

Students consider public administration principles and organizations, internal governmental administrative structures, the
interactions between organizations and their environments, personnel and policy procedures, administrative
communication methods, and other management techniques. This course may not be offered annually.

END

EDPA 02410:

Students analyze U.S. public policy using a variety of conceptual models including cost-benefit analysis. Case studies are
emphasized. This course may not be offered annually.

Public Policy

END

EDPA 02412:

A study of the federal regulatory process and the politics of regulatory agencies in the U.S. Emphasis is upon the political
economy of regulation. This course may not be offered annually.

Administrative Law And The Regulatory Process

END

EDPA 02490:

Students are provided with an opportunity to get first-hand experience in government administration and related political
processes through work in a variety of public settings (government agencies, public officials' offices, law firms, etc.).

Public Service Internship

END

Social Policy and the Welfare State

EDPA 07333:

Using a comparative lens, this course examines the main theories and empirical developments in welfare state and social
policy analysis. Special attention is paid to the role of politics in both new and emerging social policy debates. A mix of
perennial and emerging (e.g. accommodating identity, immigration, and aging) social policy problems are discussed.

END

Blockchain Applications

INTR 01301:

Prerequisites: Earned at least 60 credit hours

This course explores the platforms of blockchain technology, which include cryptocurrency for digital currency and that of
protocol execution for contracts and distributed applications. Cross-functional business and social uses, including public,
private, and federated blockchain networks, are also included.

END

Introduction To Government And Politics

POSC 07100:

Professors who teach this course will normally focus on some, but not all, of the following topics: political and
governmental structures, functions, and processes; political behavior; public law and public policy; and political values or
philosophies.

END

POSC 07110:

This course focuses on the American Federal government, emphasizing the structure, operation and processes of our
political system. Coverage will include political values as they are reflected in major public policies.

American Government

END

Survey Of Western Political Theory

POSC 07200:

This course provides students with an understanding of Western political thought from Plato to Karl Marx. It surveys
Western political theory and analyzes such major concepts as order, justice, freedom, authority, power and political
obligation.

END

State And Local Government

POSC 07220:

This course studies legislatures, executives, judicial systems and bureaucrats in the working of state and local government
and the influence of political parties, interest groups, and elections on government policy. It examines inter-governmental
relations and the role of state and local government in the federal system. This course may not be offered annually.

END

POSC 07230:

This course presents a comparative analysis of the fundamental law, political institutions, policies and processes and their
relationship to political culture in Britain, France, the C.I.S. and a selected Third World country.

Comparative Political Systems

END

Campaigns, Political Parties And Interest Groups

POSC 07303:

This course compares the functions of U.S. political parties, interest groups, and political movements in recruiting and
nominating candidates for public office, supporting campaigns and elections, organizing and staffing government,
representing and shaping public opinion, and rationalizing and mobilizing the vote. The U.S. system is compared to the
systems of other countries. Special attention is given to the civil rights movement, the reform of the presidential election
process, and the candidate-centered professional campaign in the decline of the influence of the political parties.

END

POSC 07305:

This course examines the structure, politics and policy-making functions within the legislative process, focusing on the role
of Congress and the state legislature in the U.S. political system. This course may not be offered annually.

The Legislative Process

END

The Presidency

POSC 07306:

This course studies the office of the President, its history, powers and role in the American political system. The course
stresses the relationship of the presidency to other branches of government and of the White House agencies to the other
elements of the Executive Branch. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Current Problems In American Politics

POSC 07308:

This course deals with selected issues of topical concern in American politics. Issues may be "headlines" that are receiving
current media attention (usually policy debates), or they may focus on more persistent problems of the kind that concern
political scientists, e.g. the consequences of party decline, the role of media in elections, etc. This course may not be offered
annually.

END

American Constitutional Law

POSC 07310:

An introduction to major concepts of constitutional law as reflected in landmark cases, this course considers such matters
as judicial review, national supremacy, the separation of powers, constitutional federalism and the commerce clause as well
as the impact of various judicial philosophies on the decisions of the Supreme Court.

END

POSC 07311:

This course examines the historical role of women in a variety of political movements, varied views of feminism and the
impact of participation on the changing status of women in American society. This course may not be offered annually.

Women And American Politics

END

Freedom Of Expression

POSC 07312:

This course considers the range of first amendment issues relating to speech, the press and the right to assemble. Issues of
censorship and national security, obscene speech, commercial speech, and libel, among others, will be discussed. This course
may not be offered annually.

END

International Security

POSC 07319:

The course discusses the theories used to explain international security, modern warfare, and asymmetric threats. It
examines pressing problems in international security that are on the agenda of nation-states and international organizations.
Examples could include armed violence, terrorism, organized crime, nuclear proliferation, poverty, infectious diseases,
energy security, and environmental degradation. The course will also address the various responses to these security threats.

END

International Relations

POSC 07320:

This course studies the distribution of power among states in the international system, the effect of system change on
national behavior, external and domestic sources of international influence and the relationship of capabilities and
intentions in foreign policy decisions.

END

POSC 07321:

This course examines selected problems such as terrorism, world population and hunger, regional conflicts and arms
control and disarmament.

Contemporary World Problems

END

The Politics of Poverty: Class, Gender, and Race in America

POSC 07323:

This course studies American responses to poverty from the New Deal through the present day. The class focuses on the
critical role that race and gender play in the formation and implementation of these policies. This course will be offered
annually.

END

The Politics of Race in American Society

POSC 07324:

This course examines the central role of race in American political culture and American politics at large. We will examine
concepts through the use of interdisciplinary resources including film, biography and scholarly materials. The course will
approach the study of race through an intersectional lens.

END

Social Movements and Political Activism

POSC 07327:

This course examines political participation and civic engagement through the lens of mass based social movements. The
course also brings to bear a focus on how social movements can lead to policy change. This class is a mix of student led field
work and traditional course work on theories of social movements and political participation.

END

Contemporary U.S. Foreign Policy

POSC 07330:

This course presents historical themes and patterns of U.S. foreign policy with special focus on the post-World War II
period. It considers the sources of influence on policy-making and the major issues in contemporary policy. This course may
not be offered annually.

END

Mass Media and Politics

POSC 07335:

This course explores various types of media, government regulation of the media, the gathering and distribution of political
news, and media use in election campaigns. It will focus primarily on the media in the United States; however, we will also
examine the broadcast media in a comparative perspective. The course will begin with an examination of the concept of
citizenship in democracy. It will study the role of new media in the American political arena and the consequences of the
current media environment for democratic governance.

END

POSC 07340:

This course examines major trends and court decisions which have affected civil rights and civil liberties. Topics which may
be raised include religion, speech, press, privacy, voting, equal protection, and due process.

Civil Rights And Civil Liberties

END

Russian, East European And Eurasian Politics

POSC 07341:

This course examines the politics and history of Eastern Europe and the fifteen Soviet successor states in contemporary
Eurasia. Processses of political, economic and social change are studied with an eye on institutional, attitudinal, and
behavioral adaptations to the new realities. This course may not be offered annually.

END

POSC 07345:

GOVT/POLIT MID-EST

END

Politics And Society Of Great Britain

POSC 07346:

This course studies the unique aspects of a political system which has functioned without a written constitution. It
emphasizes the historic development of British constitutional notions, and the relationships between the major institutions
of monarchy, the parliament, the cabinet and political parties. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Politics Of The Middle East

POSC 07347:

This course provides students with an introduction to the rise of states, social movements, and contentious politics in the
greater Middle East region. The course begins with the decline of empires and state formation up through the 20th century,
then examines political change in the region, (Islamist mobilization, revolution, civil war and democratization), and
concludes with a survey of contemporary issues, such as nationalism, Muslim minority politics, women and politics, and
changes in international politics since September 11, 2001.

END

POSC 07350:

This course focuses on the political systems and processes of major Asian nations: India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Indonesia,
Japan and China. This course may not be offered annually.

Introduction To Asian Political Systems

END

Russian Foreign Policy

POSC 07351:

Students study the historical record of Soviet foreign policy since l9l7, examining the relative importance of ideology and
national interest and other domestic and external influences on Soviet policy-making. The course also discusses policy
process and contemporary problems of policy. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Methodology And Statistics In Political Science Research

POSC 07360:

This course considers the varied ways that political scientists study problems, with primary attention to scientific method
and quantitative skills. Students are expected to become adept at using and interpreting forms of descriptive statistics
commonly used in the social sciences.

END

POSC 07370:

This course is a vehicle to allow visiting scholars to offer courses in their specialties which are not part of regular course
offerings. This course may not be offered annually.

Special Topics In Political Science

END

Politics And The Judicial Process

POSC 07375:

This course describes and analyzes the American judicial process, with particular attention to the role of the judicial
branch in developing public policy. Topics to be explored include jurisprudential theories of the law, the organization and
staffing of courts, civil and criminal process, judicial selection methods, judicial behavior, the legal profession, law and social
change and the political and social impact of court decisions.

END

Politics On Film

POSC 07380:

This course in American national politics and government uses film and other examples of popular culture as tests to
supplement conventional readings, lectures, and assignments. Topics include political culture, political institutions,
campaigns, and public policy.

END

Environmental Policy

POSC 07385:

This course will introduce students to major national debates over environmental politics and policy. It will discuss both
theory and practice, emphasizing the political, organizational, scientific and economic drivers shaping environmental policy.
It will also use case studies to explore the history and results of the environmental movement.

END

American Political Thought

POSC 07400:

This course studies the development of American political thought from colonial times to the present through major
thinkers. Ideas are considered in relation to political events and broader historical movements to which they are connected.
This course may not be offered annually.

END

Contemporary Political Thought

POSC 07401:

This course considers major l9th and 20th century ideologies from the perspectives of thinkers who helped shape them. It
considers socialism, fascism, liberalism and conservatism through the works of writers like Marx, Mill, Ortega and Burke.
The course may also consider contemporary rethinking of contract theory (e.g. Rawls, Nozick). This course may not be
offered annually.

END

Selected Problems In Constitutional Law

POSC 07410:

Prerequisites: POSC 07310

This course explores specific issues in recent Supreme Court decisions, and the process through which such issues are
resolved, emphasizing one or two areas of current interest. This course may not be offered annually.

END

POSC 07415:

Students spend three days hearing oral arguments at the Supreme Court. Prior research on an assigned case will culminate
in a paper in which the student will predict the outcome of the Court's decision.

In-Depth Study Of The Current Supreme Court

END

International Law

POSC 07420:

This course considers the role of law among nations, the source of international law in practice and convention and the
national courts, international courts and other vehicles for adjudicating and enforcing international law. This course may not
be offered annually.

END

International Organizations

POSC 07421:

This course studies the League of Nations, the United Nations and other international and regional organizations in
relation to such functions as peace-keeping, conflict resolution, international consensus-building, etc. This course may not
be offered annually.

END

POSC 07441:

Political Problems Of Modern Africa

END

Seminar in Political Science - WI

POSC 07489:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and POSC 07360

This course stresses careful reading and research in primary and secondary material related to selected problems in political
science. Primary emphasis will be on writing a critical and analytical paper.

END

POSC 07490:

(Open only to senior political science majors) This course stresses careful reading and research in primary and secondary
material related to selected problems in political science. Primary emphasis will be on writing a critical and analytical paper.

Seminar In Political Science

END

POSC 07491:

This course focuses on individual projects under the guidance of a faculty member; it cannot be used as a substitute for a
course offered by the department. This course may not be offered annually.

Independent Study In Political Science

END

CANNABIS HISTORY, CULTURE, & SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS

CANN 03101:

This introductory course will present the rich history and culture of cannabis, its use and impact on society and social
institutions. Students will study the history of cannabis from its ancient past to its place in the contemporary globalized 21st
century world. Student will learn the cultural influence of cannabis on entertainment, politics, religion, race, gender, and
class, exploring its evolution over time. This course is designed to foster critical thinking and logic about past, present, and
future impacts of cannabis on cultures and social institutions by developing a more in depth understanding of its history. To
this end, it is important that students recognize the inclusive approach toward understanding the equity issues related to the
history and culture of marijuana.

END

Cannabis Legislation and Society

CANN 03201:

This course will present an overview of the creation of legislation, legislative process and statutory interpretation of
legislation. The course will focus on the practice of law as it relates to the emerging area of cannabis law, legal ethics, and
inclusive responsibility within the field of cannabis law. While an emphasis will be on New Jersey, there will be an
examination of the burgeoning field of law surrounding the diverse use, sale, and production of cannabis. Students will have a
clear understanding of federal and state laws that govern the legalization of cannabis. Moreover, the course will discuss the
basic elements of the political, social, and economic forces that affect change thereby guiding the future direction of
cannabis law.

END

Cannabis Industry

CANN 03301:

Cannabis Industry offers a diverse overview of the burgeoning field of the production, sale, consumption of cannabis.
Students will have an understanding of the social, anthropological, historical, economic, and cultural forces that shape the
cannabis industry.

END

Social Psychology of Sport

PSY 00371:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 and HES 00370

Social Psychology of Sport examines issues related to athletic performance based on theoretical perspectives and current
research addressing the impact of social concepts on sport and exercise. Topics include relationships in sport, such as
coach-athlete and peer, team cohesion, group dynamics, effective communication, coach impact on leadership, motivational
climates and athletic transition.

END

The Psychology Of Ethnic Identity & Community In America

PSY 01105:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course will facilitate students' development of knowledge and appreciation of racial/ethnic identity formations and
their impact on intergroup relations and orientations toward community in America. Students will engage in a variety of
individual and collaborative strategies for studying their own and others' racial/ethnic identities, interracial and interethnic
relations and the prospects for constructing a sense of pluralistic and egalitarian communities.

END

Essentials Of Psychology

PSY 01107:

Students will be introduced to psychology, the scientific study of behavior. This course will highlight the key areas in
psychology that help to explain human behavior. This course will include discussion of diverse topics such as, perception,
learning, thinking, memory, motivation, emotion, stress, and health, personality, physiological processes, psychological
disorders and treatment, development, intelligence, and social psychology.

END

Essentials of Psychology for Pre-Health Students

PSY 01108:

Prerequisites: Declared Pre-Health Concentration or enrolled in CMSRU Post-Bac in Premedical Sciences program

This specific Essentials of Psychology course is designed for students planning to attend medical school and take the
MCAT, which includes a new section on Psychology. This class will prepare students to take that section of the MCAT.
Students will be introduced to psychology, the scientific study of behavior. This course will highlight the key areas in
psychology that help to explain human behavior. This course will include discussion of diverse topics such as perception,
learning, thinking, memory, motivation, emotion, stress, and health, personality, physiological processes, psychological
disorders and treatment, development, intelligence, and social psychology.

END

Navigating Psychology

PSY 01199:

Prerequisites: B.A. in Psychology or B.S. in Psychological Science as declared major

This course provides students with information and guidance regarding their future education in Psychology. This
introductory class gives incoming Psychology students resources that they will need to guide their coursework, professional
development, and research/employment to further their psychological education and future careers. This course will prepare
students to make decisions that will tailor their Psychology program to their interests and goals. During this course,
assessments are also taken as a part of larger program assessment.

END

Psychology Of Women & Cultural Experience

PSY 01200:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course explores the influence of gender, race, and class in the psychological development and experience of women in
cultural contexts. Although it will primarily focus on the lives of women in the United States, an attempt will be made to
provide linkage to women's experiences globally. Topics covered will include the role of gender bias in the history of
psychology, female personality development, women in the workplace, women's psychosexual issues, and the role of gender
in health and wellness.

END

Psychology Of Personality

PSY 01230:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

Students study major theories of personality and techniques for measuring personality. Personality is that field of
psychology that investigates the predispositions or inherited characteristics and the acquired or learned qualities that affect
an individual.

END

African American Psychology

PSY 01235:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course introduces students to a critical analysis of the psychosocial development, behavior and relationships of Black
people within the sociohistorical context of the United States. It facilitates students' examination of issues relating to
methodology and assumptions underlying past and current research on the psychological study of African Americans. The
course also enables students to examine theory and research on the effects of significant sociocultural factors on the lives of
African Americans, with particular focus on physical development, language and communication styles, models of identity
and social-emotional development, intellectual and academic development, sexual behavior and attitudes, health issues, and
empowerment.

END

Psychology of Scientific Thinking

PSY 01301:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

Students will be introduced to the methods of science and the role that science plays in the understanding of how the
world works. The development of critical thinking skills and an evidence based approach to evaluating scientific claims will
be emphasized. Students will also be introduced to the psychological processes that underlie the scientific method and the
persistence of belief in pseudoscientific and non-scientific claims.

END

Research In Perception - WI

PSY 01302:

Prerequisites: PSY 01104 and PSY 07210

This course provides an overview of how the study of perception integrates psychophysics, sensory and physiological
psychology, and neuropsychology in an attempt to understand the principles guiding the way in which humans obtain
information about the world. Topics include the scientific study of the sensory systems, classical and contemporary
psychophysical methods, principles of perceptual organization, aftereffects, perceptual illusions, and the real-world
implications of these phenomena. This course contains a laboratory component that emphasizes the use of scientific
methodologies in Perception. Only matriculated psychology majors may register for this course.

END

Psychology And Law

PSY 01305:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

A course in the relationship of psychology and law, this course studies how the law has used psychological concepts and
data. It examines legal issues of significance for psychologists and examines psychological research as it relates to the legal
process.

END

PSY 01310:

Psychology Of Racism And Ethnocentrism: Causes, Development, Consequences, Solutions

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course provides an opportunity for students to develop critical understanding of psychological perspectives regarding
the root causes, complex patterns, and the individual, group, and societal consequences of racism and ethnocentrism in the
United States of America. The course will draw upon comparative data regarding the psychological factors involved in
historic or contemporary race and ethnic relations within selected international contexts to explore parallel and unique
cross-cultural phenomena.

END

Behavioral Assessment And Measurement

PSY 01316:

Prerequisites: PSY 02310

This course provides students with the knowledge and skills needed to conduct behavioral assessments and choose
appropriate target outcomes and intervention strategies. Additionally, students will learn to objectively measure behavior,
display data graphically, and experimentally evaluate the effectiveness of behavioral interventions. This course is one of the
courses required for the Specialization in Behavioral Services for Children and Their Families in the psychology department.

END

PSY 01326:

Perception

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course involves the study of sensation and perception. Topics include the scientific study of sensory systems, classical
and contemporary psychophysical methods, principles of perceptual organization, aftereffects, illusions and space
perception.

END

Cognitive Psychology

PSY 01327:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course involves the study of information processing. Its topics may include the history and methods of cognitive
psychology, selection and processing of sensory information, pattern recognition, memory processes, language acquisition
and cognition.

END

Health Psychology

PSY 01329:

Prerequisites: (PSY 01107 or PSY 01108) and PSY 01301

This course is concerned with the role of biophsychosocial factors in teh promotion of health, prevention of and treatment
of illness, the etiology of illness, and ways to improve the health care system. Students will learn widely studied and
empirically supported theories of health behaviors in relation to behavioral risk factors. They will focus on theories,
assessement and treatment of the primary behavioral problems encountered within behavioral medicine, such as sleep
disorders, sexual dysfunction, high risk sexual behaviors, obesity, eating disorders, chronic pain, substance
abuse/dependency, and tobacco addiction.

END

Occupational Health Psychology

PSY 01331:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

Occupational Health Psychology focuses upon factors affecting the physical and mental health of individuals within
organizations. Students will learn the various aspects of organizational structure and policy that can favorably or negatively
impact upon worker stress, engagement, and productivity, and understand the actions that both individuals and
organizations can take to address those factors and improve employee health.

END

Positive Psychology

PSY 01336:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

Positive psychology is the scientific study of optimal human functioning, with a focus on the character strengths and
virtues that enable individuals to live lives that are rich in meaning and direction. The class will emphasize various aspects of
well-being, including happiness, engagement and purpose, and will explore applications of the positive paradigm to personal
change, clinical and counseling work, and the development of positive organizational and educational practices.

END

PSY 01419:

Individual educational and research projects including independent study are offered. Student must have approval of
faculty instructor before registering for this course. Regular meetings with faculty instructor are required.

Independent Study In Psychology

END

Advanced Research I-WI

PSY 01420:

Prerequisites: Minimum B grade in the following: PSY 01301 AND PSY 07301 AND PSY 07303

This course is the first in a two-course sequence focused on conducting empirical research in psychology. During this
course, students will begin an empirical research project, including a literature review, conceptualization of the hypothesis,
design of the methodology, and exposure to ethical review board procedures. Students will write an APA-formatted research
proposal.

END

Advanced Research II-WI

PSY 01421:

Prerequisites: PSY01420 minimum grade B.

This is the second in a two-course sequence focused on conducting empirical research in psyhology. During this course
students will complete an empirical research project that was started in Advanced Research I-WI (PSY 01.420). This course
includes data collection, statistical analysis, and interpretation of results. The final project will be reported in an
APA-formatted research paper.

END

Field Experiences In Psychology

PSY 01422:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

Because of the limited enrollment in this course, priority is given to psychology majors. It is suggested that the student
have a minimum of 60 hours of college credit which should include at least 15 hours in psychology. Students are assigned
placements in supervised settings such as community mental health centers, drug rehabilitation centers, and schools.

END

Seminar In Psychology: Topics

PSY 01423:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108 AND 2 or more 300 or 400 PSY courses

This course enables the faculty to offer substantive courses in specialty areas which are not offered on a regular basis.
Students should have substantive preparation in the specialty area of the course.

END

Professional Issues In Applied Behavior Analysis

PSY 01424:

Prerequisites: PSY 02305 (Concurrency Allowed) AND PSY 02310AND PSY 02320 AND PSY 02325

This course is a capstone course in Specialization for Behavioral Services for Children and their Families, providing an
in-depth overview of innovative and empirically validated behavior assessment and intervention techniques aimed at
promoting system-wide change. Students will be exposed to professional development as behavior analysts including ethical
issues, career options and responsibilities, and development of clinical skills.

END

Fieldwork in Applied Behavior Analysis

PSY 01425:

Prerequisites: PSY 02305 AND PSY 02320 AND PSY 02325

Students should be matriculated in the Specialization for Behavioral Services for Children & Families OR the
Post-Baccalaureate in ABA to enroll in this course due to limited enrollment. Students are assigned placements in applied
settings under the supervision of a Board Certified Behavior Analyst (BCBA) to gain experience in the design and
implementation of behavioral interventions. Students are required to complete 150 hours of supervised fieldwork in their
assigned placements.

END

Research Clinic in Psychology

PSY 01426:

Prerequisites: Must be a Psychology major with 60+ credits, and PSY 01301 and PSY 07301 and PSY 07303 and Permission of Instructor

This course focuses on developing students’ skills in conducting psychological research at the undergraduate level.
Students will develop skills in writing and presenting their research work at a professional level. They will disseminate their
work through seminar and conference presentations.

END

History & Systems In Psychology

PSY 01429:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course presents the history of psychology, giving a comprehensive treatment of theories and systems in psychology.
The student should have a substantial background in psychology before taking this course.

END

Psychology Senior Capstone

PSY 01499:

Prerequisites: Students must have at least 100 completed credits

This course provides students with information and guidance regarding their future careers in Psychology and the
resources they will need to further their education and possible careers. During this course, assessments are also taken as a
part of larger program assessment.

END

Essential Skills for Behavior Technicians

PSY 02200:

In this competency-based course, students will acquire the skills needed to work directly with individuals with significant
behavioral needs within a tiered service delivery model. In this course, students will complete the 40-hour training
requirement and competency assessment for eligibility for the Registered Behavior Technician® (RBT®) credential.

END

Psychology as a Profession and Practice

PSY 02300:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course will introduce students to traditional and emerging applied areas in psychology, with the goal of increasing
students' knowledge about how psychological information is used to impact peoples lives. In addition, students will learn
how psychological knowledge can be applied in ways that allow us to better understand the individual and the broader social
world. Finally, students will explore possible career paths in psychology and learn how to best prepare themselves for a
career in psychology or related fields post graduation.

END

PSY 02305:

Prerequisites: PSY 02310

This course deals with the principles, procedures and utility of behavior modification in normal and clinical settings.

Applied Behavior Analysis

END

Research In Cognitive Psychology - WI

PSY 02307:

Prerequisites: PSY 01104 and PSY 07210

This course involves the study of information processing. Its topics may include the history and methods of cognitive
psychology, selection and processing of sensory information pattern recognition, memory processes, language acquisition
and cognition. A laboratory component is appended to the course, but does not fulfill General Education laboratory
requirements.

END

Research In Learning And Behavior-WI

PSY 02308:

Prerequisites: PSY 01104 and PSY 07210

This course provides an overview of theories of learning and the experimental analysis of behavior. Topics may include
classical conditioning, operant conditioning, and schedules of reinforcement. This course contains a laboratory component
which emphasizes the use of the scientific method in learning and the experimental analysis of behavior. Only matriculated
psychology majors may register for this course.

END

Research In Social Psychology - WI

PSY 02309:

Prerequisites: PSY 01100 and PSY 07210

This course provides an overview of how individuals affect the thoughts and behaviors of other individuals. It examines
social behavior from a multicultural perspective which emphasizes the effects of gender, race, and ethnicity on social
interaction. Topics may include social cognition, attitude change, affiliation, conformity, intergroup conflict and
cooperation. This course contains a laboratory component which emphasizes the use of the scientific method in social
psychology. Only matriculated psychology majors may register for this course.

END

Learning And Behavior

PSY 02310:

Prerequisites: (PSY 01107or PSY 01108) or Matriculation in the Post-Baccalaureate Certificate in Applied BehaviorAnalysis

This course provides an overview of the experimental analysis of behavior with minor attention to other theories of
learning. Topics may include classical conditioning, operant conditioning, and schedules of reinforcement.

END

Single-Subject Research Methodology

PSY 02320:

Prerequisites: PSY 02310

This course provides students with the knowledge and skills to choose and implement an appropriate single-subject
experimental design. Single-subject designs, in contrast to group designs, focus on repeated assessment of a small number of
participants. Visual display and analysis of data is common in single-subject design research and will therefore be a focus in
the course.

END

Functional Behavior Assessment

PSY 02325:

Prerequisites: PSY 02310 and (PSY 02320 may be taken concurrently)

This course provides students with the knowledge and skills needed to conduct behavior assessments, interpret behavioral
data obtained from behavior assessments, and choose appropriate, socially significant behavior change outcomes and
intervention strategies based on these interpretations. The course will emphasize the breadth of the function-based
behavior analytic problem solving approach and demonstrate the model’s ability to effectively and ethically address a wide
variety of problems of human concern. This course is required for students in the Concentration in Behavioral Services for
Children and their Families and the Post-Baccalaureate Certificate in Applied Behavior Analysis.

END

Psychological Disorders

PSY 03200:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

Psychological disorders are characterized by disturbances in emotion, cognition, or behavior associated with impaired
functioning and/or excessive (non-normative) distress. This course will review the historical/contemporary context for
diagnosing, the scientific principles for studying/treating disorder, the criteria-sets associated with identifying disorders, as
well as the the social, biological, individual and cultural/environmental factors that are believed to influence the
development (or perception) of disorder.

END

Intake And Interviewing Skills In Psychology

PSY 03205:

Prerequisites: (PSY 01107 or PSY 01108) and PSY 03200

This course is designed to prepare undergraduates to be able to perform an initial interview or intake in an entry level,
human service position. Topics include basic skill development, understanding of content and process in interviewing,
family interviews, use of standard intake procedures, and ethical considerations in interviewing.

END

PSY 03320:

Introduction to Clinical and Counseling Psychology

Prerequisites: Matriculation in BA in Psychology or PSY 03200 or PSY 09305 BS in Psychological Science and

The goal of this course is to introduce students to fields of clinical and counseling psychology. This course will survey core
principles and practices in the fields of clinical and counseling psychology, including major theoretical and training models,
research methods in clinical and counseling psychology, basics of evidence-based clinical assessment and diagnosis, and
evidence-based approaches to psychotherapy. This course will help interested students explore potential careers in clinical
and counseling psychology and learn about the differences and similarities between the two fields.

END

PSY 03320:

Introduction to Clinical and Counseling Psychology

Prerequisites: Matriculation in BA in Psychology or PSY 03200 or PSY 09305 BS in Psychological Science and

The goal of this course is to introduce students to fields of clinical and counseling psychology. This course will survey core
principles and practices in the fields of clinical and counseling psychology, including major theoretical and training models,
research methods in clinical and counseling psychology, basics of evidence-based clinical assessment and diagnosis, and
evidence-based approaches to psychotherapy. This course will help interested students explore potential careers in clinical
and counseling psychology and learn about the differences and similarities between the two fields.

END

Motivational Interviewing Processes in Psychology

PSY 03400:

Prerequisites: PSY 03205

This course will provide students with an overview of the psychological constructs underlying human motivations for
behavior change and a basis in entry level skills and techniques in motivational interviewing. Students will learn the role of
motivational interviewing and basic motivational interviewing skills in behavior change. Theory and skills application
opportunities include substance use and abuse disorders, mental health disorders, problematic health behaviors, healthcare
treatment adherence, academic achievement, and personal goal attainment. The cross disciplinary nature of motivational
interviewing theory and skills and the intersection of psychology and counseling, educational, healthcare, and criminal
justice fields will be examined from a practical standpoint. Students will have an opportunity to learn and practice basic
applied skills.

END

Environmental Psychology

PSY 05205:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course involves the study of people and their physical setting. Its topics include environmental perception and
cognition, social processes and the environment, individual development and the environment, contrast between natural
and built environment and city and urban design.

END

Social Psychology

PSY 05206:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course examines the psychological, social and cultural factors that shape the social behavior of the individual. It
investigates such topics as affiliation, conformity, leadership, group processes; attitude formation and change; intergroup
cooperation and conflict. The primary focus is on the individual in social context.

END

Psychology Of Human Sexuality

PSY 05310:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course provides an overview of the current scientific knowledge concerning human sexuality. It examines data from
national surveys and controlled laboratory studies.

END

Introduction to Sport and Exercise Psychology

PSY 05320:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

Introduction to Sport and Exercise Psychology examines theories and models of psychology related to performance.
Topics include personality, exercise environments, motivation, arousal, stress and anxiety, group processes, performance
enhancement and exercise and psychological well-being. This course is a prerequisite for Social Psychology of Sport.

END

Psychology Of Conflict And Conflict Resolution

PSY 05402:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

Students investigate the basis for conflict in social and personal situations. The course attempts to isolate a number of
contributive variables and explores possible alternatives to destructive conflict. It employs different research approaches
and attempts to help interested students examine and develop innovative approaches to use in the resolution of conflict
within social relationships.

END

Community Psychology

PSY 05410:

Prerequisites: PSY 05206 and PSY 01107

This course provides an overview of the field of community psychology. Its topics will include preventive approaches to
mental health, crisis intervention, community-based treatment approaches, systems theory, community mental health
centers, organization theory, paraprofessionals, the use of self-help groups and community psychology in the schools and
criminal justice system. The course provides a conceptual framework for community psychology.

END

Psychological Tests And Measurements

PSY 06300:

This course examines the nature and use of psychological tests and the social and ethical implications of testing. It
emphasizes principles of test construction: reliability, validity and item analysis. Statistics should be completed before or
concurrently with this course.

END

Psychology Learning Assistant Seminar

PSY 07300:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor

This course is designed to aid students in their undergraduate Learning Assistantships. Students will apply and extend their
knowledge of content in their assigned course by giving presentations on topics in the course that they are assisting.
Students will also develop skills to excel as tutors and potential future teaching assistants or instructors.

END

Statistics in Psychology

PSY 07301:

Prerequisites: (PSY 01107 or PSY 01108) AND PSY 01301

This course focuses on the many statistical procedures used in psychological research. Students will learn to select and
calculate appropriate procedures to analyze both quantitative and qualitative data. They will gain an understanding of how
to select and perform descriptive, correlational, and inferential procedures. There will also be emphasis throughout the
course on learning to use statistical software.

END

Research Methods in Psychology

PSY 07303:

Prerequisites: (PSY 01107 or PSY 01108) AND PSY 01301 AND PSY 07301

This course addresses research design and methodologies for data collection in psychological research. Observation,
correlational, and experimental techniques are studied. Also examined are ethics in research and responsible interpretation
of research results. There will also be an emphasis throughout the course on applying statistical concepts learned in
Statistics in Psychology (PSY 07301), culminating in a formal research project.

END

Advanced Statistics in Psychology

PSY 07400:

Prerequisites: PSY 07301 with minimum grade of B

This course builds upon the material covered in Statistics in Psychology (PSY 07303) and focuses on the more advanced
statistical procedures commonly used in psychological research. Topics will include data management, factorial ANOVAs,
and multiple regression analyses. Students will learn how to conduct analyses using statistical software, interpret results
appropriately, and report the results according to the guidelines of the American Psychological Association.

END

Consumer Psychology

PSY 08215:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course introduces behavioral science research and methods in consumer behaviors. It emphasizes the processes of
learning, perception, motivation, and social behavior and their effect on consumer attitude, buying behavior, advertising and
effective mass persuasion. The course also includes product design and evaluation and consumer protection and awareness.

END

Personnel Psychology

PSY 08220:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course introduces the application of psychological principals and research findings in the personnel systems of
organizations. Its topics include personnel testing and selection; instrument development; job analysis and evaluation;
performance appraisal; training systems, and the models for human resource utilization.

END

Industrial/Organizational Psychology

PSY 08310:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course studies application of psychological theories, methods, principles and findings to various problems of
industrial, business and public organizations. It covers personnel selection, testing, and training; organizational behavior;
safety, equipment and systems design, and consumer behavior.

END

Child and Adolescent Development

PSY 09209:

The content of this course covers the physical, cognitive, perceptual, linguistic, emotional, social, moral and sexual
development in humans, from the womb through adolescence. The influence of biological and sociocultural mechanisms
underlying development within these domains are also considered.

END

Adolescent Development

PSY 09210:

This course studies current theory and practice related to biological, cognitive, psychoanalytic, psychosocial, sexual and
moral development in adolescence. Students gain experience in developing beginning levels skills in selection and use of
evaluative techniques and in the use of activities appropriate to the various levels of adolescent development. This course is
intended for nonmajors and will not fulfill requirements of the Psychology major. Psychology majors must take Lifespan
Development (PSY 01308) in order to fulfill the requirements of the major.

END

Lifespan Development

PSY 09218:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course provides an overview of human development across the lifespan, including physical, cognitive, social, and
personality development. All the major lifespan developmental theories and research will be presented, with heavy emphasis
on students' critical thinking about research. This course will cover both normative and atypical development across the
lifespan, including the major physical, mental health, and social problems occurring during the life span.

END

Developmental Psychopathology

PSY 09305:

Prerequisites: (PSY 01107 or PSY 01108) and PSY 09209 or PSY 09218

Using a developmental framework, the student will examine normal and abnormal behavior from infancy through
adolescence. Students will learn about the pathways to normal and abnormal behavior, explore the factors that place
children at risk for problems as well as the factors that protect children from adversity. Topics will include autism,
depression, anxiety, aggression, attentional difficulties, developmental delay, and physical illness.

END

Introduction to Human Factors

PSY 09400:

Prerequisites: (PSY 01107 or PSY 01108 or ENGR 01102 or INTR 01265) AND (PSY 01327 or Instructor Permission) AND (PSY
07301 or STAT 02100 or MATH 01130 or HES 00346)

This course will define Human Factors (HF), which looks at design from the perspective of users and their needs, and
demonstrate the various applications of HF in our daily lives (e.g., gaming, social media, healthcare, telecommunications,
and defense). This course will explore the complexity and limitations of human information processing, and illustrate how to
take this information into account when designing systems. Students will gain an appreciation of the cognitive, physical,
environmental, and social aspects in design, and of the impact of cognitive biases. Students will also learn how to apply
human centered design best practices to make a system, product, process, or application both usable and useful.

END

Human Factors Methodology

PSY 09401:

Prerequisites: PSY 07303 and PSY 09400 Permission from Instructor

This course is a follow up to Introduction to Human Factors (PSY 09400). This is an elective course for Psychology,
Engineering, and Computer Science majors and minors who are interested in careers specializing in human-centered design,
User Experience (UX) design, and Human Factors Engineering (HFE). This course will discuss specific Human Factors
research methods such as task analysis, cognitive task analysis, user testing and interviews, prototyping, protocol analysis,
safety and reliability analysis, and heuristic evaluation. Students will learn the purposes and practices of Human Factors
methods and will experience the research process including concept proposal, experimentation, writing the research paper,
and presenting the findings.

END

Physiological Psychology

PSY 10315:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

An introductory course in physiological psychology designed to give the student an understanding of the neural processes
mediating behavior. A study of advances in such areas as the neural coding of memory and learning; control of human
behavior and emotions through physiological changes; the environment as it affects the nervous system; psychobiology of
sex; psychosomatic illness; and instrumentation and techniques for investigating problems in physiological psychology.

END

Drugs, The Brain, and Behavior

PSY 10375:

Prerequisites: PSY 10315 or PSY 01326

This course examines the basic neurophysiological functioning of drugs and their influence on behavior. Students will learn
about the properties of depressants, stimulants, and hallucinogens, and how they change human behavior. Biological
advances in the area of addiction will also be studied. Topics covered in this course also include how drugs are used to treat
psychological and neurological conditions.

END

European Research Methods in Neuroscience

PSY 10385:

Prerequisites: PSY 10315 and BIOL 01113 or BIOL 01104 or MCB 01101

This course investigates the historical aspects and current research methodology in European Neuroscience. This lecture
course contains a 1-week required experiential travel component to Europe. This course encourages and facilitates global
experiences of an educational and cultural nature for students with respect to European research methods in neuroscience.
It will enhance students’ historical, cultural, and social perspectives in neuroscience by attending conferences, visiting
exhibits, and participating in cultural activities surrounding the early developments in neuroscience in Europe. This course
will be beneficial for all students in understanding the various aspects of European neuroscience research, which has its roots
in the late 19th century. Students participate in pre-travel orientation meetings and a post-travel meeting outlined herein. In order to 
receive credit for the course, students must attend 90% of the pre-travel meetings and the post-travel meeting and
submit a final written project which includes a reflective summary of their international experience.

END

Neuroplasticity and Learning

PSY 10415:

Prerequisites: B+ or higher in PSY 10315

This course is designed to address a central question of psychology and cognitive neuroscience: how does the brain encode
new information? In this class, students will explore leading theories on the brain changes that accompany learning and
memory processes. Topics will include synaptic plasticity, long-term potentiation, and neurogenesis.

END

Hormones, The Brain, and Behavior

PSY 10425:

Prerequisites: PSY 10315 or PSY 01326

This course examines the basic neurophysiological functioning of hormones, how they interact with the nervous system,
and their influence on behavior. Students will learn about the properties of hormones and how they affect sexual
differentiation and reproductive behaviors, learning, memory, biological rhythms, homeostasis, and psychological disorders.
Biological advances in behavioral neuroendocrinology will also be studied.

END

PSY 10480:

Cognitive Neuroscience

Prerequisites: B+ or higher grade in PSY 10315,or Permission of Instructor.

This course examines the neurological bases of the mind and mental processes. Topics will include the historical bases of
thought and mind, anatomical foundations of thought at the systems and neural levels, methods for testing mental
processes, and subject areas encompassing perception, attention, memory, development, change, and disease. Students will
be required to contribute to class discussions, present summaries of major theories and findings to the class, and critically
assess current opinions and techniques used in the field.

END

Psychopharmacology And Biological Bases Of Behavior

PSY 10610:

Prerequisites: Matriculation in CAGS in Clinical Mental Health Counseling OR MA in Clinical Mental Health Counseling OR MA
in Clinical Mental Health Counseling and B- of more in PSY 01623

This course will provide an understanding of basic neurological mechanisms and how they are affected by psychotropic
medications. It includes a description of the functioning of neurotransmitters and their role in the etiology of some mental
illnesses. The course will review the major classes of psychotropic medications and their use for specific psychological
disorders. The integration of psychotropic medications into best practice treatment plans and case management is
discussed.

END

Educational Psychology

PSY 22215:

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course considers the fundamental principles of learning and the implications of these principles for the understanding
of human behavior. It covers empirical and theoretical issues in learning through examination of laboratory data and their
extension to life situations.

END

PSY 22320:

This course deals with several major learning theorists and their work. Students critically describe, explain and integrate
research findings. This course is generally recommended by graduate schools.

Theories Of Learning

END

Educational Psychology

PSY 22512:

The dynamics involved in the process of learning are emphasized. An objective of the course is a consideration of the ways
psychology can be of value in facilitating the teaching-learning process. Such topics as formulating objectives, motivation
and evaluation of learning are considered.

END

PSY 22586:

An intensive study of the basic theories of learning and current research in motivation and learning is emphasized in this
course. Stress is placed upon the significance of these theories and investigations for educational practices.

Psychology Of Motivation And Learning

END

Advertising Media Budgeting

ADV 04232:

Media planning is a key element of advertising campaigns, focused on configuring the brand message, audience, frequency,
time/timing, and advertising media mix within a given budget. In this course, students use primary and secondary data from
a variety of marketing consumer information sources, databases, and reports to define the consumer profile and media mix
for an advertising campaign.

END

Introduction To Advertising

ADV 04330:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

The course provides an overview, including techniques and terminology that are useful in the professional world. Topics
include history of advertising, marketing, ethics, law, consumer behavior, print and electronic media, and retail and
corporate advertising. The course combines theory of advertising with practical applications.

END

Advertising Strategies

ADV 04352:

Prerequisites: ADV 04375 and PR 06310

This course explores the methodologies and tactics involved in planning advertising campaigns. Students examine research
sources, strategic planning techniques, media placement, copywriting & testing. Students will review presentation
techniques, theme-within-a-theme and other related strategic thinking.

END

Advertising Practicum

ADV 04355:

Prerequisites: 75 Credits Required

Advertising practicum allows students to apply their skills and knowledge by working on campus with department faculty
on a variety of technical, creative, or research-related assignments. Students can earn 1 credit for every 40 hours of work,
with most practica implemented for 3 credit hours. Students keep a detailed log of working hours, prepare an extensive
portfolio, write an analytical critique of the practicum and submit the work to the faculty supervisor for grading.

END

Integrated Marketing Communication

ADV 04360:

Prerequisites: PR 06350 and ADV 04330

This course explores the expanded as well as the communication portion of the organization's business and marketing
plans. Emphasis is placed on how to translate marketing strategies into a well-defined and seamless communication program
directed at all of the organization's publics.

END

Essentials of Design

ADV 04370:

This course develops visual communication skills, teaching non-art majors how to think like a designer. Students will
explore the creative design process with digital tools and design software, learning to effectively use and organize basic
elements: typography, images, and color. They will examine and analyze case studies in graphic design, developing ability to
critique design solutions. Students will use critical thinking skills, learning the essential descriptive vocabulary of graphic
design and typography and how to designer’s choices about type and image work together to communicate specific content.

END

ADV 04375:

This course introduces students to creative writing in advertising. It will explore the basic principles of writing copy and
developing creative products for print and electronic vehicles.

Advertising Copywriting

END

ADV 04405:

Independent Study - Advertising

END

Portfolio Preparation

ADV 04420:

Prerequisites: ADV 04330 and PR 06310and ADV 04375

This course will provide students practical application of creativity in advertising. It covers a range of topics including the
nature of creativity and the application of creative strategy to various media. By the end of the term, students will develop
and produce finished campaigns that will provide a well-defined portfolio.

END

Account Planning

ADV 04421:

Prerequisites: ADV 04330 and PR 06310and ADV 04375

This course will explore the role of account planning and its contribution to developing strategic advertsising campaigns.
Students will learn to review and interpret qualitative and quantitative research and to translate this research into valuable
consumer insights.

END

Media Planning

ADV 04432:

Students study media as social and economic forces in our society; the course examines major media with emphasis on
comparative value in regards to cost, audience, production problems, time factors, product stability and cost effectiveness.
Students get considerable actual practice in media planning activities. A research unit is included.

END

Advertising Campaigns - Wi

ADV 04434:

Prerequisites: ADV 04352 and ENGL 01112

This course prepares students to undertake and complete an extensive, creative, effective professional advertising
campaign. The course includes instruction on how to prepare the speech which is made when the campaign is pitched to the
client, extensive marketing and advertising research, final polishing of copywriting skills and a well prepared final oral
presentation.

END

Graduate Strategic Visual Communication

MAPR 01568:

The ability to conceive, produce and deploy rich visual imagery is now a core requirement for advertising and PR
practitioners. To help students prepare for this rapidly evolving field, this class explores how and why visual media have
overtaken text-based content. Through practical, hands-on individual experiences and class projects, it provides a
framework for understanding the different types of visual media and their participants, choosing the right tools, and
devising the strategies to succeed in this new digital era.

END

Online Public Relations

MAPR 06515:

Public relations has moved to the Internet, and in the process online communication skills have become essential to online
and offline public relations practice. Online public relations explores the practical tools necessary for using the internet in
public relations and provides a broad overview for creating an online newsroom.

END

PR 01403:

Special Topics In Public Relations

END

Contemporary Issues in Strategic Communication

PR 05221:

This introductory course provides an overview of prominent issues affecting the practice of strategic communication in
diverse industries, such as entertainment, sports, media and the news, business, and government. Students will explore
contemporary challenges posed by the digital, global, and increasingly competitive nature of modern strategic
communication. This course is for all students who wish to survey the diverse nature and important aspects of strategic
communication.

END

Strategic Public Relations in Health Care

PR 05317:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112

This course focuses on the role of public relations within the healthcare system. Students will learn to apply fundamental
research and public relations planning models to health care, including how to use professional principles and practices in
strategic public relations when working within corporate, government, agency, community and nonprofit settings to build
relationships with key constituents.

END

Strategic Visual Communication

PR 05318:

Strategic Visual Communication explores the media visual technology that has become an essential part of the advertising
and public relations world. Through practical, hands-on individual experiences and class projects, the course helps students
understand the different types of visual media and their participants, choose the right tools, and devise strategies necessary
to succeed as they develop this critical skill for Advertising and Public Relations practitioners.

END

International Public Relations

PR 05319:

This course focuses on the nature of international communication in an increasingly interconnected and interdependent
world. Students will explore the nature of shared culture and the power of effective communication within different
community and global structures.

END

Strategic Communication Overview

PR 05350:

Strategic Communication Overview will provide a comprehensive look at the integration of public relations, advertising
and marketing communication. The class develops the role of public relations and advertising in the strategic
communication environment. It addresses research, public opinion, the media, as well as law and ethics.

END

Basic Public Relations Writing

PR 06301:

Basic Public Relations Writing introduces students to the tasks of writing and editing required in a public relations
position. Students will learn to write for both print and electronic media, develop their skills in grammar, syntax and usage
and learn to copy edit their own work and the work of others.

END

Writing Basics In Public Relations And Advertising

PR 06303:

Writing Basics in PR and Advertising is a 5-week writing boot camp that helps students to better transition into more
advanced forms of public relations writing. The course helps polish students' writing and provides an overview of grammar
and usage rules along with sentence structure, organization, and proofreading.

END

Advanced Public Relations Writing

PR 06305:

Prerequisites: ADV 06301

Advanced Public Relations Writing polishes writing and editing skills students need for a professional public relations
position. Students will learn how to write persuasive copy for both internal and external audiences, produce written
marketing support products, and prepare speeches and advanced editorial copy for business and organizations. Students will
also learn advanced copy preparation techniques.

END

Social Media and Sports Communication

PR 06306:

Prerequisites: PR 05350 or ADV 04330 and PR 06350

In this course students will learn strategies for engaging key constituencies through the use of targeted social media
communication. Key concepts include choosing appropriate social media platforms, building a social media policy, crafting
and planning messages that enhance current communication activities, and using social media to build relationships with the
fan base and local communities.

END

Sports & Entertainment Event Planning

PR 06307:

Prerequisites: (PR 06350 and ADV 04330) OR PR 05350

In this course students will explore theoretical and technical aspects of designing and producing sports and entertainment
events for the local, national, and international stage. Students will review the important concepts related to events
management and rights management necessary for managing, promoting, and facilitating events as strategic components of
an organization's efforts to develop relationships with internal and external constituencies.

END

Reputation Management and Crisis in Sports

PR 06308:

This course explores the process of managing sports communications before, during, and after crisis situations occur as
part of the overall effort to maintain positive relationships with key publics and establish, or re-establish, organizational
reputation. In this course students will review common crisis situations affecting sports entities, including those related to
individual and team performance inside and outside of the playing arena.

END

Sports Branding and Fan Relations

PR 06309:

Prerequisites: PR 05350 or ADV 04330 and PR 06350

In this course students will learn strategies for using elements of branding to develop key relationships with fan bases and
the sports community. Key concepts include establishing an identity for the sports team as a part of the larger community,
using branding to set expectations for the fan experience, leveraging brand equity to expand the influence of sports
programs and athletes, and implementing strategies to grow fan bases in support of larger causes including those related to
youth and community development activities.

END

Introduction To Public Relations/Advertising Research

PR 06310:

Prerequisites: 60 credits required

The course studies both qualitative and quantitative research methods necessary for success in the fields of public relations
and advertising. Emphasis is placed on evaluation of secondary searches, individual and group interviews, media audience
measurements, market structure, segmentation and usage studies, and tracking studies.

END

Publication Layout and Design

PR 06317:

Prerequisites: 45 credits required

This course focuses on design, layout, and make-up of brochures, magazine and newspaper pages, newsletters, fliers, and
advertisements. Students will learn how to coordinate art and typography with content. A workshop approach is used to
show students how creativity in design can increase the effectiveness of communication. Students learn how to work with
various computer applications to achieve effective layout.

END

Social Media Management and Metrics

PR 06324:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111

Media Metrics and Analytics provides a thorough grounding in how media consumption is measured (metrics) and utilized
(analytics) by media organizations and independent professionals. The course spans traditional circulation of print
publications, broadcast, cable, and radio ratings, web site traffic measures, social media statistics and advertising data. Media
Metrics and Analytics examines the types of measures that, for example, are now commonly displayed on monitors in
newsrooms as a way to gauge success of a story, or are used by entrepreneurs to evaluate the overall success of various media.
No special statistical background is necessary, and the course is geared toward using programs and tools that are designed
for use by non-technical personnel.

END

Introduction To Public Relations

PR 06350:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course explores the history and role of public relations in society. Students explore mass media, persuasion, publicity,
radio and television. Students examine special events, crisis management, communication techniques, research and
evaluation, communication law and ethics. Basically a theory course, this introduction also applies ideas practically to real
clients and organizations.

END

Case Studies In Public Relations - Wi

PR 06353:

Prerequisites: PR 06305 and PR 06310 and COMP 01112

This course reviews and predicts how organizations solve their public relations challenges. Students write case statements,
position papers and solutions involving publicity demands, special events, promotions, image problems and other challenges.
Students role-play key personnel, working through problems in seminar simulations. Writing, speaking, thinking and
presenting ideas are emphasized.

END

Impact Of Public Relations On The News

PR 06354:

Prerequisites: PR 06301 or JRN 02310

The course is a semester-long journey into the information management world where the professions of journalism and
public relations often find strong parallels but equally as often are locked in competiton over how important local, national
and world events and issues will be reported and explained to the public.

END

PR 06355:

Public Relations/Advertising Law and Ethics

Prerequisites: (PR 06350 and PR 06301) or (ADV 04330 and ADV 04375)

The course will give students a broad perspective into law and ethics as they relate to the public relations and advertising
professions. Specifically, the course will familiarize students with the "Code of Professional Standards" of the Public
Relations Society of America and with major laws governing advertising, broadcasting, publishing and speaking. The course
will also focus on First Amendment Law and examine business case law that pertains to public relations and advertising.
Students will develop ethical stances about communication and will improve in judging ethically unclear situations.

END

Public Relations Practicum

PR 06359:

Prerequisites: 75 credits required

Public relations practicum allows students to apply their skills and knowledge by working on campus with department
faculty on a variety of technical, creative, or research-related assignments. Students can earn 1 credit for every 40 hours of
work, with most practica implemented for 3 credit hours. Students can earn credit for working for PRAction, Rowan
University's in-house agency for its Public Relations Student Society of America Chapter. Students keep a detailed log of
working hours, prepare an extensive portfolio, write an analytical critique of the practicum and submit the work to the
faculty supervisor for grading.

END

Public Relations/Advertising Internship I

PR 06360:

Prerequisites: Public Relations or Advertising majorwith Major GPA of 2.5 and (PR 06301 and PR 06305)or (ADV 04375 and ADV
04421) or(ADV 04375 and ADV 04420)

Under professional supervision in the field, students practice theories and skills learned in the classroom. Students earn 3
credits for 120 hours of work. Students keep a detailed log of working hours, prepare an extensive portfolio, write an
analytical critique of the practicum, and are evaluated by their faculty supervisor.

END

Public Relations/Advertising Internship II

PR 06362:

Prerequisites: Public Relations or Advertising majorwith Major GPA of 2.5 and (PR 06301 and PR 06305)or (ADV 04375 and ADV
04421) or ADV 04420

Under professional supervision in the field, students practice theories and skills learned in the classroom. Students earn 3
credits for 120 hours of work. Students keep a detailed log of working hours, prepare an extensive portfolio, write an
analytical critique of the practicum, and are evaluated by their faculty supervisor. Field Experience II is offered to students
who successfully complete Field Experience I and who seek to get an additional 3 credits of internship experience.

END

Public Relations/Advertising Internship III

PR 06364:

Prerequisites: Public Relations or Advertising majorwith Major GPA of 2.5 and (PR 06301 and PR 06305)or (ADV 04375 and ADV
04421) or ADV 04420

Under professional supervision in the field, students practice theories and skills learned in the classroom. Students earn 6
credits for 240 hours of work. Students keep a detailed log of working hours, prepare an extensive portfolio, write an
analytical critique of the practicum, and are evaluated by their faculty supervisor. Field Experience III is reserved for
students who wish to complete all 6 credits of their 240-hour internship with the same sponsor.

END

PR 06405:

Independent Study

END

Advanced Publication Layout and Design

PR 06425:

Prerequisites: PR 06317

This course provides a thorough experience in print production through its various stages: writing, edition, choosing styles,
layouts, imposition, proofs, and printer specs. Students build on the skills and knowledge acquired in Publication Layout and
Design (JRN 02317). They work with various page sizes, edit photos and art, creative multiple-page documents such as
booklets and magazines, and format a brand identity to implement in their projects.

END

Public Relations Planning - Wi

PR 06454:

Prerequisites: PR 06353 and COMP 01112

This course introduces students to the components of a comprehensive public relations campaign: research, audience
identification, message construction, channel selection and evaluation. Working with clients, students create and write an
entire program for a variety of challenges, including image change, new product or service introduction, information,
recruitment, crisis management, employee relations, persuasion and others. Students practice a complete PR plan.

END

Public Opinion

PR 99362:

Prerequisites: PR 06310

This course includes the nature and role of public opinion, the dynamics of public opinion processes and the numerous
factors which shape or influence opinion. Students examine the mass media, evaluating their roles as molders and reflectors
of public opinion. Major topics that influence public opinion are discussed, including gratifications, agenda setting,
knowledge gaps, censorships and propaganda.

END

Introduction to Figure Anatomy for the Artist

BMV 09251:

This course is designed to strengthen the students understanding of observational figure drawing and anatomy. Students
will develop skills and techniques to accurately recreate the human form by learning the fundamentals of skeletal and muscle
anatomy of the human body. The course will serve to improve observational and realistic figure drawing skills, by learning
the anatomical relationships and techniques for visualizing form. This course will provide the student the opportunity to
interpret anatomy knowledge by working directly from the figure in the drawing studio and the human cadaver at the
Cooper Medical School.

END

Introduction to Natural Science & Zoological Illustration

BMV 09252:

This course is designed to develop a strong foundation in concept development and observational drawing skills. As well as
integrate traditional and introductory digital media techniques within the subject matter of drawing plants, animals, and
natural science content. Both traditional forms of media (graphite, pen/ink, charcoal, color pencil etc.) and digital forms of
media production will be used to illustrate subjects through demonstrations and visual problems. The course will focus on
the integration of traditional and digital media, as it related to realistic and representational drawing. Students will learn
professional production methods and design conventions within the field of natural science and zoological illustration.

END

Introduction to Digital 3D Modeling

BMV 09253:

This is an aesthetics based media course that communicates digital 3D content for both biomedical art (didactic) media
and entertainment media (illustration, animation, game design etc.). The course is designed to cover concepts in digital 3D
organic and inorganic object modeling, which includes observational modeling, conceptual process modeling, and narrative
modeling. Students will learn to develop a broad range of modeled content including but not limited to characters, objects,
and environments. The digital models designed are rendered and composited as 2D illustration to solve specific visual
communication problems. The software (Autodesk 3D Studio Max and Mudbox) used in the course are industry standards
for 3D computer graphics production. The subject matter within the Specialization in Biomedical Art and Visualization
reflects the subject matter of science and medicine. Students in broader areas of art (sculpture, illustration, painting, etc.)
will be able to focus on specific subjects relevant to their artistic goals using the 3D methods and techniques.

END

Introduction to Digital Rendering and Illustration Methods

BMV 09356:

This course is designed to develop strong observational skills, and integrate digital media rendering and painting
techniques within the scope of biomedical content and visual problems solving. This goal will be to convey an aesthetically
powerful illustration, which effectively provides a solution for a specific visual communication. The student will learn a
vocabulary for expressing pertinent natural science and medical art concepts in relation to technique design, composition,
object accuracy/integrity, and context. Students will learn digital rendering techniques and methods to depict concepts in
digital continuous tone and color (Adobe Photoshop and Illustrator). The integration of digital techniques will be uses in
unique ways to explore the boundaries of medium and convention in modern production. Elective students in the broader
areas of Art, Design, Science, and Medicine will be required to apply the concepts and techniques taught in class to specific
content pertinent to their major of study.

END

Storyboarding & Animation

BMV 09360:

This is an aesthetics based course that communicates animated narratives in the areas of art and science. This course serves
as an introduction to animation of objects, environments, animals, humans and natural science subjects. Students will learn
to create 2D and 3D animations of narratives with goals to communicate a message and/or educate the viewer on their story.
The student will learn pre-visualization skills in the form of storyboarding to problem solve their ideals before animation.
The student will use pre-visualized concept art to animated short stories of the body, environment, and/or natural science
through the medium of 2D and 3D digital animation software (Adobe Flash, After Effects and Autodesk 3D Studio Max.)
The principles of 2D and 3D digital space and motion/timing will be used as the foundation of production. The subject
matter within the Specialization in Biomedical Art and Visualization reflects the subject matter of science and medicine.
Students in broader areas of art (sculpture, illustration, painting, etc.) will be able to focus on specific subjects relevant to
their artistic goals using the animation methods and techniques.

END

Scientific and Medical Sculpture

BMV 09361:

This course is designed for students interested in learning the structure, anatomy, and features of the head and its relation
to facial reconstruction. This course will strengthen the student’s understanding of the muscles in the face, bone, and
landmarks of the skull. Students will also understand how these two groups contribute to each individual’s appearance. Age,
race, and gender will be discussed and considered in the re-creation of the face. Demonstrations of techniques, lectures, and
critiques are part of the course work. Projects will include study sheets, in-class assignments and some projects that can be
completed at home. However, most assignments will be done in class. The course is needed for the instruction of advanced
techniques and concepts in biomedical visualization. The course contains specific projects, which reflect the demands of
industry specialization and career training expectations. Specific visualization problems in: medical sculpture, prosthetics,
and forensic sculpture are required in the course.

END

Introduction to 3D Animation Introduction to 3D Animation

BMV 09366:

Corequisites: ART 09630 and ART 09253 Prerequisites: BMV 09253 and BMV 09360

This studio course is designed as an introductory platform to aesthetically investigate and discover specific techniques in
3D Animation as applied to commercial industry standards and outcomes. This course introduces students to all the major
features of 3D Animation software with a focus on specific 3D animation techniques from basic expressions of time, curves,
motion paths, shape deformations, basic rigging, introductory dynamics and simulated scenarios (fluid, cloth and particles),
along with teaching the professional workflow for multi-frame rendering and short movie composites. The student is
exposed to all relevant aspects of 3D Animation CG creation with an eye toward giving the student a base foundation from
which to explore and expand their creative ideas and stories. Students will learn how to depict narratives in 3D with a focus
on their major specific content, interdisciplinary projects and collaborations. The lecture and demonstrations in the course
are balanced between learning 3D animation software and the art studio practice of applied theory, history, and concepts
that give a foundation of context and audience reception. The Introduction to 3D Animation course is open to all majors
with the required pre-reqs.

END

Advanced Problems in Biomedical Art

BMV 09373:

Prerequisites: ART 02222 and (ART 09251 or BMV 09251) and (ART 09252 or BMV 09252) and (ART 09356 or BMV 09356)

This course entails developing skills and knowledge necessary for effective visual communication of complex biomedical
concepts and subject matter. The focus will be on developing conceptual visual story telling skills. Students will learn to take
complex information presented by specific biomedical subject matter and selectively simplify it to solve visual
communication problems effectively for the target audience. Students will work exclusively in digital media to develop
competence and efficiency in the rendering methodologies and learn the conventions of modern production. The course is
needed for the instruction of advanced techniques and concepts in biomedical visualization. The course contains specific
projects which reflect the demands of industry specialization and career training expectations. Specific visualization
problems in: medical/legal, veterinary, pharmaceutical, molecular, editorial, textbook, journal visualizations and required in
the course.

END

BMV 09400:

Independent Study

END

Introduction to Game Media Design

BMV 09453:

This is an aesthetics based course that communicates and focuses on educational and casual game content through the
fundamentals of game media design. The course materials and projects will help students understand how and why games
can be used for learning in the fields of health, medicine, science, and social change. Students will also learn how casual
games can be a powerful learning tool in social situations. The course exposes students to examples of current work and
research in game design mechanics, game art production, game learning mechanics, and assessment mechanics, which are
important to designing successful and engaging games. Students will learn use traditional drawings media, the Adobe
Creative Cloud, and specific game engines to develop their games. Students will be exposed to industry-specific examples of
educational and casual games (social games, learning games, news games, health and science games, and exercise-games etc.)
These examples alone with specific lecture topics, demonstrations and material, will allow students to learn how to develop
their own educational and casual games projects that deliver content through game media and design.

END

Surgical Illustration and Media

BMV 09454:

Prerequisites: ART 02222 and (ART 09251 or BMV 09251) and (ART 09356 or BMV 09356)

This studio course is an introduction to the illustration of surgical procedures and its fundamental application within the
discipline of biomedical art. It is based on the belief that understanding the concepts of medical/and or veterinary surgery is
essential to creating effective illustrations and other media that visually communicate the information. Students will
research surgical procedures and techniques, sketch procedures in the operating room, prepare comprehensive sketches
outlining visual narrative of surgical procedures, and render final illustrations/media presentations using a variety of digital
media.

END

Biomedical Art Senior Thesis Exhibition & Portfolio Capstone

BMV 09456:

Prerequisites: ART 02222 and (ART 09251 or BMV 09251) and (ART 09252 or BMV 09252) and (ART 09356 or BMV 09356) and
(ART 09360 or BMV 09360) and (ART 09453 or BMV 09453) and (ART 09454 or BMV 09454) and (ART 09253 or BMV 09253)
andART 09352 and ART 09353

This course is designed to act as a summative experience for the student. The final BFA Thesis Project will be defined by
the student and work with a level of professional collaboration. The requirements for the BFA Thesis will be to solve and
effectively visually communicate a medical and scientific problem. Integration of outside resources, research effective
collaborator/expert communication, professional practices, presentation (oral and written) and documentation of the
process of the semester long project. The project visualization will be student driven; content needs will be determined by
the student and the research/collaboration. The emphasis in this course will be on the conceptual development of the
content accuracy/relevance and its realization through the design process. The final B.F.A. capstone project will have the
following: A two Sentence (Maximum) Thesis Statement, a designed/written proposal, research paper, business oriented
documentation, a digital presentation to explain the work, artist statement/project scope statement, and the final project
depicting the solution for the BFA Exhibition.

END

Video Art

PHOT 09375:

This course is a hands-on studio workshop that covers concepts, issues, and techniques related to video, exploring the
growing range of genres and applications from within the arts and industry including video installation, narrative film,
documentary film, performance video, and exhibition documentation. Students will create their own video-based projects as
well as learn about the theory and practice of artists working in the medium. This course supports the fine arts experience by
cultivating innovation, visual creativity, experimentation, intellectual enquiry and the acquisition of professional video
production techniques.

END

Introduction to Film Photography

PHOT 11251:

This course provides an introduction to black and white film photography. Topics will include the use of a manual 35mm
camera, film processing, darkroom printing, and an overview of the works of influential fine art photographers. Camera and
darkroom techniques in black and white still photography are used to explore and discover the visual world. Students will
produce original work that will be discussed in regular class critiques. Students will provide their own camera.

END

Intermediate Film Photography

PHOT 11276:

This intermediate studio emphasizes the development of a critical eye and the use of black and white photography as a
form of self-expression and an artistic medium. Students are expected to have a working knowledge of the 35 mm
photographic process. Students advance their technical skills in photographic printmaking, and further understand
photography as fine art. Students advance their technical skills in photographic printmaking, and further understand
photography as fine art. Students work on long term individual projects, which will develop technical, aesthetic and
conceptual mastery of their medium. Students will provide their own cameras.

END

Intermediate Digital Photography

PHOT 11350:

This intermediate studio course emphasizes the development of a critical eye and the use of digital photography as forms
of self-expression in an artistic medium. Students develop ideas and choose approaches to generate an individual
project-based portfolio. Topics also include advanced image and color correction in Photoshop and an introduction to
studio lighting techniques. Students work on long term individual projects, which will develop technical, aesthetic and
conceptual mastery of their medium. Students must provide their own camera.

END

Non-Silver Imagery

PHOT 11375:

This studio course explores historic and experimental image capture and processing techniques in photography, including
non-silver processes such as Cyanotype, Gum Print, Liquid Light, Van Dyke Brown, and Toning. Students learn to
incorporate bookmaking and other fine arts applications, while perfecting their knowledge of black and white photography.
Students provide their own cameras.

END

Digital Photography

PHOT 11380:

This course provides an introduction to digital photography. Students are introduced to technical and aesthetic issues that
relate specifically to digital photography in the fine arts. Topics include digital camera operation, composition, color
correction, image manipulation, as well as a comprehensive knowledge of the tools available for photographers in
Photoshop. Students will produce original work that will be discussed in regular class critiques. Students must provide their
own cameras.

END

Large Format Photography

PHOT 11385:

This studio course introduces students to the operation of a 4x5 view camera. Students learn about lens selection, the use
of camera swings and tilts, and the process procedures for sheet film. Students also learn about the work of many
photographers who continue to work with large format cameras. The influence of large format photography on art and
society will be examined in addition to the study of the aesthetic nature of the medium. Cameras will be available for
students to borrow.

END

Photographic Lighting

PHOT 11386:

This course covers the use of natural and artificial light used in photography, both in the studio and on location. Students
will become familiar with key concepts, including understanding and controlling the quality of light and the architecture of
multiple light set ups. The course will cover ideal lighting for portraiture, still life, and interior spaces.

END

Editorial Photography

PHOT 11387:

Editorial photography tells a story with images. Unlike photojournalism, where the photographer is tasked with objectively
documenting an event, editorial photography calls upon the unique artistic vision of the photographer to produce/direct
illustrative imagery. This course will explore photography’s role in publishing and online media industries, including the
photographic practices of reportage and the use of photography to illustrate stories, concepts and ideas. Students will be
introduced to various roles within the industry, from photographer to photo editor to art director, and how they work in
collaboration to convey a story or an idea.

END

Contemporary Issues in Photography

PHOT 11388:

Contemporary Issues in Photography is a course covering critical theory, studies in contemporary artistic practices, and
current social and ethical topics facing contemporary photographers and artists. In addition, students will research and
write about current and historical issues in relationship to their own artistic studio practice, helping to enrich the student’s
ability to communicate visually. The course is based on contemporary exhibitions in the artworld; recent books, magazines,
and catalogs; and individual research. Classes will be augmented by field trips to galleries and museums.

END

PHOT 11390:

This course provides extended study in photography. The topical content may vary each time the course is offered.
Students may enroll in this course multiple times.

Special Topics in Photography

END

Advanced Photography

PHOT 11406:

In this course, students will develop a specific project to be worked on throughout the semester and formally presented at a
final review. Weekly critiques of student work will be the emphasis of the course with time dedicated to developing artist
statements and technical proficiency in the presentation of their final project portfolio. The course culminates in a survey
critique of students’ work in preparation for their exhibitions of a finished body of work in their Capstone course.

END

Capstone in Photography

PHOT 11407:

This course synthesizes the goals and objectives of both required and elective coursework and introduces students to the
rigors of maintaining an active professional photographic practice. Students will learn the practical skills and approaches
necessary to comfortably enter the marketplace. The course culminates in public senior thesis exhibitions that include both
visual and written components.

END

Expanded Photography

PHOT 11408:

This course will explore the intersection of photography and other media including video, sculpture and performance.
Students will use cameras to produce work that moves beyond a traditional photographic “print” and will gain familiarity
with modern and contemporary artists and filmmakers working in the fields of experimental film and video, installation, and
expanded photography. Students will consistently produce work for the class in response to readings and assignments,
culminating in a final portfolio of works.

END

GENERAL PHOTOGRAPHY

PHOT 39330:

This course uses the 35mm camera, black and white film and paper to study the aesthetics and technology of photography.
Students expose and develop the film, make prints and participate in critiques and photo displays. It emphasizes
photography as an art form as well as a technical endeavor through study of composition, materials and equipment. Students
provide their own cameras and supplies.

END

RTF 01402:

Special Topics

END

Radio Production I

RTF 03100:

The course is designed to provide students with a basic understanding of producing a news program and developing a radio
documentary. Students will gain an understanding of how to produce a radio news program by working with The Rowan
Report, a half-hour news show that airs on WGLS-FM, on a weekly basis during the semester. Students are expected to
serve as producers and on-air talent for the show. Also, they will gain hands-on experience with Metro Source, a
news-gathering system used by Rowan Radio and audio editing software.

END

Survey of American Film and Television

RTF 03150:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111

Through a survey of contemporary American film and television, this course will introduce students to the major analytical
and critical approaches scholars have used to understand these complex cultural forms in both their aesthetic and ideological
dimensions. This course will introduce non-RTF majors to the basic concepts of film and television analysis and criticism, as
well as the history and economics of the two mediums.

END

Podcasting

RTF 03200:

Prerequisites: RTF 03100

This course offers students advanced concepts and techniques for the production of audio content using sound as the
primary medium. Students will learn editing concepts, audio post production techniques, and sound design, through the
study and production of content for podcasting.

END

Foundations of Media Production

RTF 03201:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111

This course is a hands-on overview of the technology currently applied in the fields of radio, television, film and new media.
From the elements of photography, sound capture, editing, lighting, and studio operation, students will rotate through
workshops and assignments that will give them the necessary foundations to pursue more field-specific courses in media
production. This course is only open to RTF majors.

END

Client Based Media Productions

RTF 03202:

Prerequisites: RTF 03201

This course introduces students to the creative processes and practical production skills required to work in the
client-based media industry. The course will outline a variety of styles and genres produced in the industry through lectures,
workshops and online discussions. Assignments will involve students in the professional processes required by the industry,
such as analyzing client briefs; developing a proposal and producing a short video at short notice to address client
requirements. This will be achieved by putting them through three practical projects with real client briefs each semester.
Through this practice, students will learn to deal with client requirements; develop an understanding of creative design and
improve on their teamwork and production skills.

END

TV History And Appreciation

RTF 03205:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and RTF 03275

TV History and Appreciation explores 50 years of the art and impact of one of the most persuasive, pervasive information
delivery systems ever invented. By viewing and discussing a wide array of clips and full episodes of programming (many from
the earliest days of the medium), students will develop an appreciation of the foundation of all entertainment and
informational programming. As well, students examine how television has affected American society and how American
society has affected television.

END

RTF 03206:

TV History And Appreciation, 1960s - 1970s

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112 and 45 earned credit hours

Students will explore televisions formative years. The course is a sequel of sorts to the earlier course, but can be taken
independently or concurrently. Students will learn about and discuss the cultural, economic and regulatory decisions that
shaped the medium and analyze TV's changing portrayal of the American family, gender roles, minority representation and
other key concepts. The history of breaking news coverage, the emergence of cable, and the rise and fall of various
programming genres - from live TV drama and the variety show to newsmagazines and reality TV - will be examined.

END

Evolution of Quality TV

RTF 03210:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112

This course presents and examines programs from television’s past and present, as well as programs that have yet to be
televised—to make connections about the evolution of quality TV. Students will be required to provide detailed reactions to
what is screened in class, and both define and defend what qualifies a work as “Quality TV” in the first place.

END

Motion Graphics

RTF 03215:

This course introduces fundamental concepts in moving image theory and practice. Motion graphics, compositing, codecs,
LUTS, kinetic typography, motion perception, lenses and lighting, video editing, animation, projection, video art, immersive
video and other applications are explored through use of readings, screenings, and studio projects. Students will gain an
understanding of both historical and contemporary moving image concepts and technologies and apply them to kinetic
works in both analog and digital formats.

END

The Television Industry

RTF 03220:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111

Designed to provide students with an understanding of the contemporary American commercial television industry, this
course analyzes the interrelationships among broadcast and non-broadcast delivery systems, stations, networks,
programming, advertising, audiences and the federal government.

END

The Radio Industry

RTF 03221:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111

This course introduces students to the principles and techniques of commercial radio broadcasting. Students learn about
licensing, sales, research, programming, and federal regulations. Students get hands-on experience with up-to-date broadcast
equipment while learning audio console operation.

END

Television Production I

RTF 03222:

Prerequisites: RTF 03370

The course introduces students to the principles and techniques of TV production. Students work in production teams
within a professional television studio setting. Students gain experience in all phases of production, including conception of
ideas, scripting, directing, and operation of equipment to produce various types of programs. Programming includes
newscasts and talk shows. Students also learn to edit 30-second commercials and PSAs.

END

Sound Communication

RTF 03224:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112 and RTF Major

This course introduces students to the production process through the medium of sound. Topics include the history,
physics, and function of sound recording as it relates to radio, television, and film media. Students will be introduced to basic
storytelling concepts and will write, create, and edit projects that incorporate sound as a primary communication tool.

END

Television Production

RTF 03230:

Prerequisites: RTF 03201 and RTF 03275

Students will build upon knowledge and skills gained in Foundations of Media Production as they learn principles and
hands-on techniques specific to television production in both the studio and field/post environments. Through small
practical workshop assignments and larger course projects, students will gain intermediate proficiency in pre-production
planning, production in the single-camera mode, including advanced lighting and field audio acquisition, production in the
multi-camera studio mode, and post-production editing, graphics and effects. Students will gain experience in non-fiction
storytelling through the production of television feature packages and related projects that culminate in a long format
magazine-style television show.

END

Film History to 1940

RTF 03270:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and RTF 03275

Students trace the development of motion pictures as an art form from the 1890s to 1941. Representative selections from
the various genres are screened, then discussed in terms of art, technique, content and historical perspective, as well as
directorial style. Part I is not a pre-req for Part II; these courses may be taken in any order; students may opt for one or
both courses.

END

Film History Since 1940

RTF 03271:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112

This course is a continuation of RTF 03.270 with emphasis on contemporary genres and implications. Students trace the
modern cinema from 1941 to the present. Students may take Part II prior to Part I; although the content is chronological,
Part I is not a prerequisite for Part II.

END

Images Of Women In Film

RTF 03272:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112

This course uses the medium of motion pictures to study cultural perspectives on women at various times through history
and in differing cultural environments. Students discuss a wide range of film treatments to examine women's changing role,
as well as social attitudes toward women as expressed by representative works of a cultural era and by writers, directors and
actors.

END

The Movie Industry

RTF 03273:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111

This course introduces students to the language of the technical elements of the motion picture and to a method for
analyzing the artwork created and the messages communicated by the motion picture. Students analyze the components of
motion pictures including color, lighting, editing, scripting, directing and acting.

END

Queer Film

RTF 03274:

This is an introductory course in film analysis where students explore the landscape of queer film through an historical,
cultural, and political lens. Discussion will focus on queer filmmakers, characters, and themes. Through a combination of
both mainstream and independent films, students will view and discuss queer films from various decades. Students will learn
methods used in film analysis and will be required write a series of analysis papers.

END

Applied Media Aesthetics: Sight, Sound And Story

RTF 03275:

This course offers students an introduction to the aesthetic concepts as applied directly to radio, television, and film
media. Using examples from these media, students will study, discuss, and analyze design and composition elements as they
apply to the production process. A basic vocabulary of aesthetic terminology will be assembled and students will be
responsible for understanding and applying those terms through various written and visual assignments.

END

African American Film History

RTF 03280:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112

This course offers students an introduction to the little-known yet important area of African American Film History,
beginning with the development of Race Movies by such directors as Oscar Micheaux, and continuing to the present day.
Through lectures, screenings and reports students will study, discuss and analyze the historical and cultural significance of
these films and their influence on society.

END

Experiencing Documentary

RTF 03285:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

Since the orgins of film, documentaries have ehlped expose social injustice, provoke dialogue about issues, educate about
historical events, and brought some of film's most memorable characters to the screen. This course provides non-media
majors the foundational production skills and conceptual framework to create ideas for documentary films. Film production
experience is not required.

END

The Media Industries

RTF 03290:

Prerequisites: 30 s.h. or more

Designed to provide an understanding of the contemporary American commercial media industries, this course affords
students the opportunity to explore media production careers and contemporary production practices within the contexts
of conglomeration, deregulation, globalization, and digitization. Students will analyze and discuss recent trends in the movie
and television industries.

END

Contemporary International Cinema

RTF 03294:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112

Contemporary International Cinema is designed as a basic introduction to world cinema, defined as the film output of
other nations, regions and non-Hollywood cinema. Students will examine the major filmmakers, production and distribution
practices of the global filmmaking community. Students will explore definitions of national and transnational cinema, issues
of representation and post-colonialism, and concepts of authorship and genre from a global perspective. Students will gain a
critical awareness of the ways in which cinema shapes our attitudes or perceptions of other cultures, and an appreciation of
cinematic representations that originate from within other cultures. Through readings, discussion, screenings and research,
students will gain a broader perspective of the current state of film as an art form, a globalized industry and cultural
products.

END

Introduction To New Media

RTF 03295:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 AND COMP 01112

Introduction to New Media surveys emerging digital communication and entertainment media and teaches new media
from the perspective of the producer. Students will discuss the evolution, social and historical implications, and production
of media forms with an emphasis on social networking, user generated and other web media.

END

Television Production II

RTF 03321:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112 and RTF 03224 and RTF 03275 and RTF 03220 and RTF 03222 and RTF Major

This hands-on course provides experience in advanced television production. Students work in production teams which
create, research, script, shoot, and edit one-minute promotional pieces and a 30-minute magazine program. All
programming airs on Rowan's cable network, Channel 5. Students will shoot in the studio and in the field, learning to use
digital production equipment in preparation for professional career work in television. All projects are edited on Avid
editing systems.

END

Radio Broadcasting II

RTF 03331:

Prerequisites: RTF 03224 and RTF 03275

Radio Broadcasting II is designed to develop the skills obtained in Radio I by increasing the knowledge about various
audio devices. Shows developed in Radio II will be scheduled as a regular part of the WGLS-FM programming. Topics
covered will further enhance the students' understanding of audio production and the associated equipment and develop
announcing skills vital not only to radio, but to all forms of audio/visual presentation.

END

A/V Production Systems

RTF 03335:

Prerequisites: RTF 03221 or RTF 03222

The course expands students' knowledge of audio and video production equipment and its specific application in
production and post-production facilities. Students learn the principles of audio and video measurement, editing
requirements and equipment interfacing. Students will understand future trends and the impact of A/V Technology on
industry economics. Demonstrations are applied to classroom experiences. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Rtf Research & Criticism

RTF 03340:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course studies the range and importance of research and criticism in the Radio, Television and Motion Picture
industries. Academic models of research and criticism are investigated as are industry practices like demographics and
ratings. Students inform their perspective of RTF as professionals and members of electronic media and cinema's global
audience.

END

Live Event TV & Video Production

RTF 03345:

Prerequisites: RTF 03222 or RTF 03230

This course provides students with opportunities to gain both theoretical and practical understanding of all phases of live
event TV & video production work, including but not limited to considerations for audio/video aesthetics, technical
requirements and proficiencies, and delivering media specific to an audience and/or client. Hands-on projects and related
assignments will allow students to explore event coverage approaches and techniques ranging from single-camera record/edit
to multi-camera live switch and broadcast/stream, and everything in between.

END

Sports TV Production

RTF 03346:

Prerequisites: RTF 03222 or RTF 03230

This course offers practical learning in sports television production. Experiential learning exercises, workshops and
assignments prepare students for producing sports content for an episodic style sportscast/magazine television show, and
contributing to live coverage of sporting events. Students work in on-camera and behind-the-scenes roles in studio, field and
post work. This is an advanced course that builds on introductory production concepts and techniques from the first level
RTF television production course. Students seeking on-air experience are highly recommended, but not required, to take
RTF/JRN Sports Broadcasting I prior to this course.

END

Rtf Practicum

RTF 03350:

Prerequisites: 75 credits required

RTF Practicum gives students the opportunity to test their skills and knowledge of the field while working on campus with
department faculty and professional staff on a variety of technical, creative and/or research related assignments. Students
can earn 3 credit hours for 120 hours of work on Practicum-related assignments.

END

Rtf Internship I

RTF 03351:

Prerequisites: RTF 03222 or RTF 03230

Students earn 3 credit hours for 120 hours of field experience on the job in a Radio, Television or Film professional setting.
The students will fulfill a wide range of duties described by the on-site supervisor and agreed to by both the student and the
on-campus faculty supervisor. Students may take up to 6 credit hours of field experience.

END

Rtf Internship II

RTF 03352:

Prerequisites: RTF 03222 or RTF 03230

Students earn 3 credit hours for 120 hours of field experience on the job in a Radio, Television or Film professional setting.
The students will fulfill a wide range of duties described by the on-site supervisor and agreed to by both the student and the
on-campus faculty supervisor. Students may take up to 6 credit hours of field experience.

END

Rtf Internship III

RTF 03353:

Prerequisites: RTF 03222 or RTF 03230

Students earn 6 credit hours for 240 hours of field experience on the job in a Radio, Television or Film professional setting.
The students will fulfill a wide range of duties described by the on-site supervisor and agreed to by both the student and the
on-campus faculty supervisor. Students may take up to 6 credit hours of field experience.

END

RTF Internship IV

RTF 03354:

Prerequisites: RTF 03222 or RTF 03230

Students earn 3 credit hours for 120 hours of intership experience on the job in a Radio, Television or Film professional
setting. The students will fulfill a wide range of duties described by the on-site supervisor and agreed to by both the student
and the on-campus faculty supervisor.

END

Film Production I

RTF 03370:

Prerequisites: RTF 03222

The course introduces students to the principles and techniques of film style production. Students work in production
teams to make a series of short films designed to familiarize them with film production techniques including camera
operation, shot composition, and editing. In addition students gain experience applying basic cinematic narrative concepts.

END

Film Production II

RTF 03371:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112 andRTF 03224 and RTF 0375 and RTF 03370

This is an intermediate synch-sound 16mm production course which emphasizes studio production techniques. Students
work in crews on short dialogue scenes designed to familiarize them with directing, script analysis, art direction, color
cinematography, lighting, and synch-sound digital editing.

END

American Film Directors

RTF 03372:

Prerequisites: 45 credits required

Through historical perspective and criticism, this course provides an in-depth study of films by American directors. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

Film Noir

RTF 03373:

Prerequisites: 45 credit hours

Film Noir is designed as an advanced film history course to explore the dark cinematic style and crime genre of Film Noir.
Students will examine major filmmakers, production, distribution practices and reception of film noir. Through readings,
discussion, screenings and research students will gain a broader perspective of how this cinematic cycle changes over time,
the production conditions in the classical Hollywood studio system, the industrial considerations and censorship
constraints, and how films grew out of earlier film history and cinematic movements overseas and in the United States.

END

Broadcast/Video Systems 1

RTF 03375:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and RTF 03222

This course is designed to introduce students to the technological framework of the hardware and software components of
video and audio production equipment used in media production. Students will learn the basic signal flows of the modern
television production studio and become proficient in the application of technology and terminology in production
facilities.

END

Broadcast/Video Systems 2

RTF 03376:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and RTF 03375

This course is designed to introduce students to the technological framework of the hardware and software components of
video and audio production equipment used in media production. Students will understand the basic application of HD
broadcast standards, AM/FM transmission technologies, and internet distribution platforms.

END

RTF 03380:

Acting For The Camera

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and RTF 03370 or COMP 01112 and RTF 03222

This course is a basic introduction to acting in front of film and television cameras. Students will study acting styles,
techniques, and theory. Each student is expected to act in at least three seperate scenes that will be videotaped and critqued

END

Screenwriting 1: Writing the Short - WI

RTF 03393:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112

The course covers the basic technical requirements for writing movie scripts and the problems of adapting material to
screen and script analysis. By viewing contemporary movies and studying plotting, point-of-view, character creation and
dialogue, students learn how a film script is put together and write an original script.

END

New Media Production

RTF 03394:

Prerequisites: RTF 03295

This is the second in a sequence of three courses in the Interactive Media specialization. Students will apply content
production skills from radio, television, and film to the production of hybrid media. Students work in teams to plan, design,
produce, and test multimedia products. Students are expected to demonstrate a high level of professionalism in completing
all work on schedule to professional standards and in their interactions.

END

Sound for Film and Video

RTF 03395:

Prerequisites: RTF 03275

Sound Communication II will provide students with advanced concepts and practices of sound recording and editing,
focusing on their application for the media of film and television. Students will explore historical and aesthetic practices of
sound effects and music for film and television, directing those concepts towards the production of the sound design of a
student film.

END

RTF 03396:

Sports Broadcasting I

Prerequisites: JRN 02361 or JRN 02310 or JRN 02210 with C- or better

Sports Broadcasting I will include play-by-play, color commentary, pre-game and post-game analysis. Students will learn
reporting techniques unique to the world of sports coverage, including interviewing sports figures. They will gain onsite
experience at Rowan's radio station as well as with Rowan's television network as they become proficient in sports talk and
sports reporting for broadcast.

END

Sports Broadcasting II

RTF 03397:

Prerequisites: JRN 02326 or RTF 03396

This course offers students advanced concepts and techniques for the production and broadcast of sports media. Students
will develop proficiency with play-by-play announcing, radio/tv reporting, and sports talk shows.

END

Current Issues In Electronic Media

RTF 03420:

Prerequisites: RTF 03220 and COMP 01112

This course analyzes and discusses the impact that current trends in media technology, economics, regulation, and
management have on content development, distribution, acquisition and consumer use.

END

Episodic Screenwriting 1 - WI

RTF 03433:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112 and RTF 03393

This writing workshop course explores the form of episodic writing for the small screen. Students analyze a variety of
episodic content, design a complete “show bible,” a document that maps a series and provides a clear sense of its characters,
tone, structure, and narrative trajectory, and write the opening sequence of a pilot script.

END

Episodic Screenwriting 2 - WI

RTF 03434:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112 andRTF 03433 and RTF 03393

This writing workshop course is a continuation of Episodic Screenwriting 1, exploring the form of episodic writing for the
small screen. Students analyze episodic content, continue to revise a “show bible,” a document that maps a series and
provides a clear sense of its characters, tone, structure, and narrative trajectory, and write and revise a complete pilot script.

END

Television Documentary And Field Production

RTF 03450:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112 and RTF 03224 and RTF 03275 and RTF 03222 and RTF 03321 and RTF 03220 and
RTF Major

This advanced production course combines extensive research and scriptwriting skills with sophisticated field production
techniques. Students select subjects of local interest to feature in high-quality, 20-minute documentaries involving
pre-production planning, actual videotaping and post-production editing. Field production includes use of single and
multiple camera units.

END

Advanced Film Production

RTF 03470:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112 andRTF 03224 and RTF 03275 and RTF 03370 andRTF 03371

This is an advanced synch-sound 16mm production course which emphasizes professional production practices. Students
participate in the planning, shooting and editing of a longer-form narrative synch-sound film project designed to familiarize
them with pre-production planning, production scheduling, large crew management, and post-production supervision.

END

Techniques Of Documentary Film Production

RTF 03471:

Prerequisites: RTF 10370 OR RTF 03370 OR RTF 03220

This course introduces students to the study of documentary form and techniques of production. It provides students with
an understanding of the styles and methods of the documentary, giving students a powerful tool for film expression.
Students will create a researched proposal for their own documentary.

END

New Media Production 2

RTF 03472:

Prerequisites: RTF 03295 and RTF 03394

This course will build upon skills and techniques introduced in New Media Production 1. Students will produce advanced,
hybrid/interactive media projects. Students work in teams to plan, design and produce multimedia projects and are expected
to demonstrate a high level of professionalism in completing all work on time and to professional standards.

END

RTF Senior Portfolio Seminar

RTF 03475:

This is a required course for all RTF majors. Students will prepare and present a digital portfolio of work created while a
student at Rowan. Students will understand the career options available to majors through discussions with various RTF
alumni.

END

Deconstructing Disney: From Mickey to Marvel

RTF 03485:

This course examines the cultural and historical significance of The Walt Disney Company, and its media products.
Students will analyze, discuss, and write about Disney using a variety of methods including historiography, industry studies,
gender and sexuality studies, critical race studies, and reception studies.

END

Screenwriting II: Writing the Feature (WI)

RTF 03493:

Prerequisites: RTF 03393

Students will learn the basic concepts of feature screenwriting through readings of professional screenplays and the viewing
of selected scenes from award-winning films. Students will develop their understanding of dramatic structure,
characterization, tone, and effective dialogue and will research and plan their own feature screenplay. By the end of the
semester, each student is expected to executive and workshop the first act of their own original feature screenplay
(approximately 30 pages). Discussions will also cover working professionally as a writer in the independent and studio
worlds.

END

Graduate Screenwriting

RTF 10523:

Graduate Screenwriting is an intensive writing workshop where students learn the basics of dramatic writing for the
screen. The first half of the course is built around screenings, lectures, discussions and exercises where students explore the
fundamentals of daily writing, dramatic structure, visual writing, characterization, dialog and proper screenplay formatting.
Film analysis will focus on classic and contemporary shorts and feature films. The second half of the semester focuses on the
development, and re-writing of a narrative short film based on an incident from a longer feature screenplay outline.

END

Developing the Documentary Series

RTF 10529:

Developing the Documentary Series introduces students to the study of the television documentary genre and techniques
of production, with particular focus on the serial formats unique to broadcast and streaming television. This course will
provide students with an understanding of the styles and methods of documentary through an exploration of its history, the
development of broadcast-specific formats including news programming, reality TV, and anthology docuseries, and insight
into the way technology has time and again enabled the evolution of the genre, to create a researched proposal for their own
documentary series.

END

Teaching In Learning Communities II-Art

EDUC 01282:

Prerequisites: C- or better in EDUC 01270

Teaching in Learning Communities II Art furthers the understanding of successful and caring learning communities begun
in Learning Communities I. A field component is required.

END

Teaching In Learning Communities II-Music

EDUC 01284:

Prerequisites: C- or better in EDUC 01270

Teaching in learning Communities II Music, is specifically designed to continue the development of an understanding of
successful and caring learning communities begun in the Teaching in Learning Communities I course and apply it
specifically to the music classroom as a "learning community." This course will be music education specific to develop a
broad and deep knowledge of music education processes throughout grades K-12 in music settings. A field component is
part of this course.

END

Teaching and Learning in the Outdoors

ENED 13201:

In this course, we will explore theories of learning applied in outdoor environmental education (EE) settings and develop
and teach authentic lessons based on this knowledge. Students will learn effective strategies for teaching and communicating
about both ecosystems and environmental issues to a range of audiences. Other course topics will include how various types
of education, including experiential, place-based, and science education contribute to teaching and learning in the outdoors.
Students will visit several outdoor teaching settings (both on campus and at environmental education centers, parks, etc),
and we will discuss the benefits and challenges of teaching in the outdoors after these visits. This course is open to
undergraduate students interested in learning more about applying environmental education in the outdoors. The course
will include one or two Saturday field trips to various EE settings.

END

Approaches to Environmental Education

ENED 13202:

This course explores the multiple dimensions of and approaches to environmental education (EE) through various
perspectives and current research in the field. Course topics include foundational knowledge about the evolution of the EE
field, exploring both formal and informal EE settings – including both indoors and outdoors, various theoretical perspectives
from the literature that have contributed to the EE field, the benefit of using a systems approach to teach environmental
issues, the importance of helping students develop an ethic of care towards the natural world, and how individual and
societal decision-making relate to environmental issues. Students will visit several different settings where EE occurs (for
example, pre-K to 12 classrooms, outdoor EE sites on Rowan’s campus, including the Fossil Park, environmental education
centers, parks, etc), and we will discuss how context affects how EE is implemented. Finally, we will examine significant
issues in the field of EE and discuss practical solutions to these obstacles. This course is open to undergraduate students
interested in learning more about the field of environmental education and the various contexts in which it is applied. The
course will include one or two Saturday field trips to various EE settings.

END

Motor Development and Motor Learning

HPE 00240:

Prerequisites: HPE 02210

This is an introductory course that includes the study of stability, locomotor and manipulative skills, and developmental
and environmental factors that affect learning in these motor skill areas. The course will focus on motor behavior changes.
Students will also be introduced to motor learning theories and concepts, assessment, and development of motor skills in
various settings. This course requires students to acquire a NJDOE background check and a TB test and has a lab
component.

END

Foundations of Fitness

HPE 00252:

Prerequisites: HPE 02210

This course is designed to provide students with the skills and knowledge to be able to design, implement, and assess a
fitness program for K-12 students. Content will focus on health and skill related fitness and include designing fitness
programs for individuals with differing needs and abilities.

END

Technology in Health & Physical Education

HPE 00270:

Prerequisites: HPE 02210

This course will prepare students in the Health and Physical Education program to use computers and technology for
organizing information, amplifying presentation, developing written documents, and gathering and storing information.
Students will evaluate software, evaluate internet sources and mobile apps, and explore non-computer media applications as
they apply to teaching and learning. An introduction to data collection and basic descriptive statistics will also be a
component of this course.

END

Pedagogy and Instructional Practices in HPE

HPE 00286:

Prerequisites: HPE 00252 and HPE 00240 and HPE 00270

This course is designed to introduce students to teaching health and physical education in K-12 settings. Students explore
the roles and responsibilities of teaching with emphasis on instructional and technical skills of teaching, student behaviors,
and the classroom environment needed to achieve student learning outcomes which address the New Jersey State Student
Learning Standards for Comprehensive Health and Physical Education. Students explore the roles and responsibilities of
teachers through the study of professional literature; class discussions and activities; simulation exercises; and direct on, and
off-campus, required K-12 field observation experiences with students, teachers and administrators.

END

Teaching Concepts of Secondary Physical Education

HPE 00310:

Prerequisites: HPE 00316 and HPE 00336 and HPE 00452 and HPE 00325

This course provides an opportunity for students to learn the characteristics of a skilled performance in a variety of
activities, including target, individual, team sports and net/wall activities. Students will be able to describe and demonstrate
the application of appropriate participation in each activity, as well as effective pedagogical techniques that lead to such
participation.

END

Teaching Concepts of Dance in Physical Education

HPE 00316:

Prerequisites: HPE 00286 and HPE 00336 and HPE 00240

This course introduces health and exercise science majors specializing in teacher certification to the skills, concepts and
knowledge necessary for instructing development and performance sequences in various rhythmic activities (creative
rhythms, routines with small hand apparatus, and novelty dances) and dance forms (folk, social, square, contra, and line). The
study of selected rhythmic activities and dance forms include: terminology, relative movement patterns, techniques, skill
performance, evaluation, basic musical structure, and teaching strategies.

END

Teaching Concepts of Secondary Physical Education II

HPE 00320:

Prerequisites: (HPE 00286 or PHED 35286)

This course provides an opportunity for students to learn the characteristics of a skilled performance in a variety of
physical activities, including invasion sports. Students will be able to describe and demonstrate the application of
appropriate participation in each activity, as well as effective pedagogical techniques that lead to such participation.

END

Teaching Concepts of Health Education I

HPE 00325:

Prerequisites: HPE 00252 and HPE 00240 and HPE 00270

This is the first in a series of two combined pedagogy and health education content courses which provide students with
knowledge along with general scope and understanding of current health issues which occur in the human lifecycle. This
course also develops an understanding of the competencies essential for planning school health education programs.
Students are given learning opportunities to develop sensitivity for the importance of integrating health education in various
settings and to address the New Jersey Core Curriculum Content Standards for Comprehensive Health and Physical
Education (Standards 2.1 through 2.4) Actual lesson planning and teaching experiences are required. Topics which will be
addressed are Alcohol, Tobacco and Other Drugs, Personal Growth and Development, Mental and Emotional Health,
Aging and Death and Dying.

END

Teaching Concepts of Health Education II

HPE 00326:

Prerequisites: HPE 00316 and HPE 00336 and HPE 00452 and 00325

This is the second in a series of two combined pedagogy and health education content courses which provide students with
knowledge along with general scope and understanding of current health issues which occur in the human lifecycle. This
course also develops an understanding of the competencies essential for planning school health education programs.
Students are given learning opportunities to develop sensitivity for the importance of integrating health education in various
settings and to address the New Jersey Core Curriculum Content Standards for Comprehensive Health and Physical
Education (Standards 2.1 through 2.4). Actual lesson planning and teaching experiences are required. Topics which will be
addressed are Family Life and Human Sexuality, Personal Health, Chronic and Infectious Diseases, Environmental Health
and Consumerism.

END

Teaching Concepts of Elementary Physical Education

HPE 00336:

Prerequisites: (HPE 00286 or PHED 35286) and HES Department Acceptance

This course is an introductory survey course designed to help prepare health and exercise science teacher certification
majors to teach relevant curriculum at the elementary school level. Students will be exposed to a number of important
activities that comprise the focus of elementary school physical education. Methods, techniques and classroom management
as they apply to teaching pertinent curriculum will be highlighted.

END

Clinical Experience in Teaching Health and Physical Education

HPE 00392:

Prerequisites: HPE 00316 and HPE 00336 and HPE 00452 and HPE 00325

This course introduces students to the nature and operation of elementary and secondary schools. Students learn to
organize instructional materials into meaningful daily lessons in both health and physical education. The course emphasizes
the development of teaching strategies, classroom management techniques and use of educational media. The field
experience involves observation, tutoring, microteaching and practice in a variety of other instructional skills. Field
assignments are sought that involve the pre-service teacher in a realistic mainstreamed classroom environment. As
application for Clinical Experience must be submitted and approved through the Office of Educator Support and
Partnerships.

END

K-12 Health and Physical Education Curriculum and Instruction

HPE 00450:

Prerequisites: HPE 00316 and HPE 00336 and HPE 00452 and HPE 00325 Corequisites: HPE 00392

K-12 Physical Education Curriculum and Instruction is a critical course designed to help prepare Health and Exercise
Science majors to become successful physical education teachers in schools. Teacher candidates will develop expertise in
curriculum construction, planning, instruction and evaluation in elementary, middle and high school. In developing this
expertise, candidates will address the NJ Core Curriculum Content Standards for Comprehensive Health and Physical
Education (Standards 2.1, 2.5 and 2.6).

END

Teaching Concepts of Adapted Physical Education

HPE 00452:

Prerequisites: HPE 00286 and HPE 00240

This course is designed to provide health and physical education teacher candidates with the knowledge and basic skills
required to meet the professional and legal mandates pertaining to general physical education for students with unique
needs, between ages 3 to 21. The course will focus on the law, placement decisions, assessment, individualized general
physical education programming, service delivery, transition planning for individuals with disabilities, professionalism in the
workplace, and awareness of the strengths and limitations of those with disabilities and methods for inclusion. This course
includes instruction in modifying sports and games, dance, lifetime fitness, and aquatics. The course includes a lab
component and completion of clinical experience hours.

END

School Health Program Planning

HPE 00453:

Prerequisites: HPE 00316 and HPE 00336 and HPE 00452 and HPE 00325

This course develops an understanding of the competencies essential in planning of health programs in schools. Students
are given opportunities for integrating and correlating health in K-12 school settings. Field experiences, planning and
teaching experiences are a part of this course.

END

Clinical Practice I in Health & Physical Education: Elementary

HPE 00457:

Prerequisites: HPE 00310 and HPE 00453 and HPE 00342 and HPE 00326

This course further develops teacher candidates’ knowledge of the operation of elementary schools. Candidates will work
under the guidance and direction of an experienced elementary health and physical education teacher. Candidates will
develop an understanding of teacher evaluation through the Danielson Framework for Teaching, and prepare for conducting
their performance assessment (edTPA) in Clinical Practice II. A minimum of 54 hours will be spent in an elementary school
setting. An application for Clinical Practice must be submitted and approved through the Office of Educator Support and
Partnerships.

END

Clinical Practice I in Health & Physical Education: Secondary

HPE 00458:

Prerequisites: HPE 00310 and HPE 00453 and HPE 00342 and HPE 00326

This course further develops teacher candidates’ knowledge of the operation of secondary schools. Candidates will work
under the guidance and direction of an experienced secondary health and physical education teacher. Candidates will
develop an understanding of teacher evaluation through the Danielson Framework for Teaching, and prepare for conducting
their performance assessment (edTPA) in Clinical Practice II. A minimum of 54 hours will be spent in a secondary school
setting. An application for Clinical Practice must be submitted and approved through the Office of Educator Support and
Partnerships.

END

Assessment Seminar in Health & Physical Education

HPE 00459:

Prerequisites: HPE 00310 and HPE 00453 and HPE 00342 and HPE 00326

This course runs concurrently with Clinical Practice I. It will prepare teacher candidates in the Health and Physical
Education program to use a variety of resources, including technology, for planning and developing assessment strategies to
evaluate student learning. It is also designed to prepare students for completing their major performance assessment
portfolio (edTPA) during Clinical Practice II. Candidates will use the cycle of planning, instruction and assessment, to
prepare them to be reflective practitioners. AN introduction to simple statistical designs will also be a component of this
course.

END

Clinical Practice II in Health and Physical Education: Elementary

HPE 00460:

Prerequisites: HPE 00457 and HPE 00458 and HPE 00459 Corequisites: HPE 00465 and HPE 00461

This course allows teacher candidates to intern on a full time basis under the guidance and direction of an experienced
elementary health and physical education teacher. Teacher candidates gain experience and develop insight and skill in the
teaching of elementary school health and physical education. An application for Clinical Practice must be submitted and
approved through the Office of Educator Support and Partnerships.

END

Clinical Practice II in Health and Physical Education: Secondary

HPE 00461:

Prerequisites: HPE 00459 Corequisites: HPE 00465

This course allows teacher candidates to intern on a full time basis under the guidance and direction of an experienced
secondary health and physical education teacher. Teacher candidates gain experience and develop insight and skill in the
teaching of secondary school health and physical education. An application for Clinical Practice must be submitted and
approved through the Office of Educator Support and Partnerships.

END

Professional Seminar in Health and Physical Education

HPE 00465:

Prerequisites: HPE 00459 and HPE 00458 and HPE 00457 Corequisites: HPE 00460 & HPE 00461

This senior-level capstone course is designed to be taken concurrently with Clinical Practice II. The seminar will focus on:
understanding the current issues in teaching health and physical education; evaluating the application of effective teaching;
understanding the parameters of professional and ethical behaviors in teaching; and preparing for a career in the field.

END

Introduction to Health & Physical Education

HPE 02210:

This course will introduce teacher candidates to core educational instructional practices and pedagogies in health and
physical education. Students will be asked to critically examine teaching in health and physical education-specific content
that spans across grade spans, with an emphasis on students’ ability to develop, and identifies effective strategies and
approaches to support the meaningful participation and learning of diverse students. Emphasis will be placed on creating
inclusive and diverse educational environments in health and physical education. This course requires students to acquire an
NJDOE background check and a TB test.

END

Clinical Experience in Teaching and Learning A Art

SECD 03330:

Prerequisites: SMED 01282; Corequisites: SECD 31350

This course introduces students to an authentic elementary art classroom in a regional school district. Field visits will
involve students in examining school and district policies, the art curriculum, field reports regarding observations of
instruction and assessment, classroom management, and teacher-student interactions. Students will collaborate on
developing one lesson plan that will be co-taught during this placement. This course consists of a class sessions and field
visits.

END

Clinical Experience in Teaching & Learning B Art

SECD 03332:

Prerequisites: SECD 03330; Corequisites: SMED 31360

This course introduces teacher candidates to a public high school art classroom setting. The course will consist of an
opening general session and field visits where teacher candidates will be introduced to school/district policies and the art
curriculum. They will observe art instruction and assessment, classroom management, and teacher-student interactions.
Teacher candidates will collaborate on designing one lesson plan that they will co-teach during this placement.

END

Clinical Practice In Subject Matter Education

SECD 03435:

Corequisites: SECD 03350 and SECD 03436

The clinical practice experience is a supervised, full-time activity conducted in public secondary classrooms, and it requires
demonstrated mastery of subject area content, lesson planning, and multiple instructional strategies to meet varied student
needs; demonstrated ability to assess learner progress and modify instruction accordingly, ability to manage all aspects of
classroom activity, ability to work collaboratively with all instructional, administrative, parental, and community members
of the classroom and school community, and ability to document evidence of doing all of the above. This is a full-time
field-based course taken in the senior year.

END

Subject Matter Clinical Seminar

SECD 03436:

Corequisites: SECD 03350 SECD 03435

This capstone seminar is designed to provide pre-service K-12 subject matter teacher candidates with a supportive
atmosphere that builds relationships with peers and mentors while offering an opportunity to synthesize the pre-service
components of their academic preparation with actual experience and emerging issues in the field of education and their
transition into the profession. Teacher candidates develop a holistic concept of their philosophy of teaching; gather and
present evidence of their comprehensive knowledge, skills, and dispositions expected of the profession; and demonstrate
knowledge of current critical and contemporary issues facing educators and those who have a stake in K-12 subject matter
education. Interviewing skills will be developed during this course. A co-req field internship is required.

END

Introduction to Instruction & Assessment in the Art Classroom

SMED 01282:

Prerequisites: INCL 02210, ELEM 02210

This course provides an introduction to instruction and assessment for the visual art classroom, K-8. Built on the learning
community philosophy introduced in the course, Principles and Pedagogies in the Inclusive Classroom, this course is a
broad overview of the field of Art Education. Standards, philosophies, theories, and teaching and learning principles that
underpin Art Education are introduced to enable teacher candidates to develop a personal philosophy of how children learn
and what teachers need to do to support and assess their learning. Candidates learn to write lesson plans with rich artistic
content and activities that advance a child’s artistic abilities and supports their cognitive, emotional, social, and physical
growth. Candidates will also learn to design assessments most often used by visual arts teachers to measure student progress
and inform future planning and practice. A field component is required wherein Art Education students examine the
context and culture of a middle school art classroom and co-teach one art lesson from a lesson set they have designed.

END

SMED 03313:

Prerequisites: SMED 01120 and INCL 02210 and ELEM 02210 and SMED 02250 and SMED 33420 and READ 30280 and SMED
32329 and (SMED 32330 or SMED 32331)

Clinical Practice I: Elementary Music

END

SMED 03314:

Prerequisites: SMED 01120 and INCL 02210 and ELEM 02210 and SMED 02250 and SMED 33420 and READ 30280 and SMED
32329 and (SMED 32330 or SMED 32331)

Clinical Practice I Secondary Music

END

Picture Inquiry with Children

SMED 10300:

Prerequisites: Acceptance into the Elementary Education or Early Childhood Education Program

The course introduces teacher candidates to the ways in which young children construct knowledge by looking at art. An
inquiry approach to examining works of art is a social activity that can profoundly influence children’s social-emotional and
cognitive development through interactions with one another, building vocabulary skills, and fostering visual literacy.
Through a series of lectures, readings, class discussions, and planning activities, teacher candidates will be introduced to the
artistic development of children’s art-making, and the use of theme-based artworks that can spark inquiry and hands-on
activities to engage children in using their imagination and applying critical thinking skills.

END

Elementary Art Methods: Teaching and Learning Art A

SMED 31350:

Prerequisites: C- or better in SMED 01282Corequisite: SECD 03330 and ART 09201

This course prepares pre-service teachers for instructing preschool, elementary and middle school students in the visual
arts. Through laboratory and clinical field experiences learners will apply theories of artistic learning to authentic arts
classroom situations while under faculty supervision. Assignments involve the learner in examining art curriculums, a variety
of assessment strategies used by art teachers in the classroom, and approaches for critiquing student works and aesthetic
enrichment. The learner will be required to prepare art lessons and units of study that demonstrate: a working knowledge of
artistic concepts and skills, an understanding of the artistic development of children, and considerations for adaptive
learning in the arts for special populations.

END

Clinical Practice I: Elementary and Secondary Art Education

SMED 31351:

Prerequisites: SMED 31360 and SECD 03332

This course provides teacher candidates with opportunities to apply the knowledge, theories, and frameworks for learning
throughout a semester-long field-based art classroom teaching experience at both the elementary and secondary levels. In
addition, a series of discussions, readings, and course assignments will focus teacher candidates on the cycle of lesson
planning, implementation, assessment, and reflection/revision. In this course, candidates develop and present evidence of
their comprehensive knowledge, skills, and dispositions expected in the teaching cycle. The teacher candidates will
demonstrate appropriate instructional planning, implementation, assessment, and reflection/revision throughout this field
experience.

END

Secondary Art Methods: Teaching and Learning Art B

SMED 31360:

Prerequisites: SMED 31350 and SECD 03330

This course prepares pre-service teachers for instructing high school students in the visual arts. Through laboratory and
clinical field experiences learners will apply theories of artistic learning to authentic arts classroom situations while under
faculty supervision. Assignments involve the learner in examining high school art curriculums, a variety of assessment
strategies used by art teachers in the classroom, and approaches for critiquing student works and aesthetic enrichment. The
learner will be required to prepare art lessons and units of study that demonstrate: a working knowledge of artistic concepts
and skills, an understanding of the artistic development of the adolescent, and considerations for adaptive learning in the
arts for special populations.

END

Clinical Practice II: Elementary and Secondary Art

SMED 31450:

Prerequisites: SMED 31351 Corequisites: SMED 31451 and SECD 03350

This senior level course provides the teacher education candidate with opportunities to demonstrate the professional
knowledge, pedagogic skills and dispositions developed in preservice professional course work. The student teaching
experience is a supervised, full-time activity conducted in public elementary, middle, and secondary art classrooms. The
experience requires demonstrated mastery of artistic content, lesson planning, instructional techniques in the arts, student
assessment and classroom management. Admission to this course requires completion of professional education courses and
near completion of academic major courses. A minimum grade point average of 3.0 in major and professional education
courses is required.

END

Clinical Practice II: Seminar for Art Education

SMED 31451:

Prerequisites: SMED 31351 Corequisites: SMED 31450 and SECD 03350

This capstone seminar for art teacher candidates provides an opportunity to establish structural knowledge that will enable
the integration of applied art classroom experiences during the subsequent weeks of student teaching and, creates a forum
for students to process new experiences in the elementary, middle and secondary schools with art professionals who share an
understanding of the context in the art classroom. Interviewing skills and a professional portfolio will be developed during
this course.

END

Clinical Practice In Music

SMED 32411:

Corequisites: SECD 03350 and SMED 32412

This senior level course provides the teacher education candidate with opportunities to demonstrate the professional
knowledge, pedagogic skills and problem-solving ability developed in preservice, professional course work. The student
teaching experience is a supervised, full-time activity conducted off-campus in a public secondary school classroom. The
experience requires demonstrated proficiency in lesson planning and evaluation, instructional techniques, student
assessment and classroom management. Admission to student teaching requires near completion of academic major,
minimum grade point average of 3.0 in major and recommendations by major field academic department and teacher
education faculty.

END

Clinical Practice Seminar In Music

SMED 32412:

Corequisites: SECD 03350

This capstone seminar for music student teachers provides an opportunity to establish structural knowledge apriori that
will enable the integration of applied music classroom experiences during the subsequent weeks of student teaching, and
creates a forum for students to process their new experiences in the schools with music professionals who share the context
for the music classroom.

END

Clinical Practice II: Elementary Music

SMED 32413:

Corequisites: SMED 32412 and SMED 21414 and SECD 03350.

This senior level course provides the teacher education candidate with opportunities to demonstrate the professional
knowledge, pedagogic skills and dispositions developed in pre-service professional course work. The student teaching
experience is a supervised, full-time activity conducted in public elementary music classrooms. The experience requires
demonstrated mastery of music content, lesson planning, instructional techniques, student assessment and classroom
management in elementary music. Admission to this course requires completion of professional education courses and near
completion of academic major courses. A minimum grade point average of 3.0 in major and professional education courses is
required.

END

Clinical Practice II Secondary Music

SMED 32414:

Prerequisites: SMED 32329 AND (SMED 32330 OR SMED 32331)

This senior level course provides the teacher education candidate with opportunities to demonstrate the professional
knowledge, pedagogic skills and dispositions developed in pre-service professional course work. The student teaching
experience is a supervised, full-time activity conducted in public secondary music classrooms. The experience requires
demonstrated mastery of music content, lesson planning, instructional techniques, student assessment and classroom
management in secondary music. Admission to this course requires completion of professional education courses and near
completion of academic major courses. A minimum grade point average of 3.0 in major and professional courses is required.

END

SMED 33220:

This course focuses on the use of educational technology in support of student learning, and integration of technology into
the P-12 curriculum. Strategies to incorporate technology and web-based tools into the school curriculum will be explored.

Educational Technology

END

Teaching/Learning A: Mathematics

SMED 33330:

Prerequisites: C- or better in EDUC 01272 andREAD 30319 and SMED 33420 Corequisite: SPED 08316 and SECD 03330

This first in a sequence of two three-credit courses is designed for students majoring in mathematics and planning careers
as K-12 mathematics teachers. Teacher candidates will learn to organize instructional materials into standards-based
mathematics units and daily lessons focused on scaffolding learning experiences in number sense, operations, and algebraic
thinking. In conjunction with a co-req practicum, this course includes both community- and public school-based
experiences dealing with a range of topics necessary to building a functioning learning community, including mathematics
pedagogy and praxis, learner diversity, lesson and unit planning, and national and state standards for mathematics.

END

Teaching/Learning B: Mathematics

SMED 33331:

Corequisites: SECD 03332 Prerequisites: SMED 33330

This second in a sequence of two three-credit courses is designed for students majoring in mathematics and planning
careers as K-12 mathematics teachers. Teacher candidates will learn to organize instructional materials into standards-based
mathematics units and daily lessons focused on scaffolding learning experiences in geometry, measurement, probability,
statistics, and discrete mathematics. In conjunction with a co-req practicum, this course includes both community-
and public school-based experiences dealing with a range of topics necessary to building a functioning learning community,
including mathematics pedagogy and praxis, learner diversity, lesson and unit planning, and national and state standards for
mathematics.

END

Teaching/Learning A: Science

SMED 34330:

Prerequisites: C grades or better in EDUC 01270 and EDUC 01272 and SMED 33420 Corequisites: SPED 08316 and SECD 03330

This first in a sequence of two three-credit courses, in conjunction with the matching field experience/practicum, focuses
on K-12 content and instructional methodology in science for the K-12 classroom with an emphasis on middle school levels.
The course content revolves around the use of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) themes in
Science for All Americans as the guiding goal for K-12 science. It introduces and elaborates on the National and New Jersey
Science Standards as the means to reach specific objectives for prospective science teachers and their future students. The
course concentrates on the use of inquiry based models in the teaching of science as defined by both the National and New
Jersey Science Standards for grades K-8.

END

Teaching/Learning B: Science

SMED 34331:

Corequisites: SECD 03332; Prerequisites: SMED 34330 Minimum Grade of C and SECD 03330 Minimum Grade of C

This second in a sequence of two three-credit courses, in conjunction with the matching field experience/practicum,
focuses on K-12 content and instructional methodology in science for the K-12 classroom with an emphasis on high school
levels. The course content revolves around the use of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS)
themes in Science for All Americans as the guiding goal for K-12 science. It introduces and elaborates on the National and
New Jersey Science Standards as the means to reach specific objectives for prospective science teachers and their future
students. The course concentrates on the use of inquiry based models in the teaching of science as defined by both the
National and New Jersey Science Standards for grades 9-12.

END

STEM: Teaching & Research Methods II: Mathematics

STEM 60502:

Prerequisites: B- or higher in: STEM 60501 Corequisites: STEM 60512 and STEM 60524

This is the second course in the 3-course STEM methods sequence for candidates in the Mathematics specialization in the
Master of Arts in STEM Education program. Grounded in national and state mathematics standards, the course introduces
teaching models that support good mathematics teaching practices. Course activities and assignment are directly connected
to the co-req resident experiences. The course will help prepare pre-service mathematics teachers to develop STEM
pedagogy in the teaching of mathematics. This course is offered annually during the fall semester.

END

STEM: Teaching & Research Methods III: Mathematics

STEM 60503:

Prerequisites B- or higher in STEM 60502, STEM 60512, STEM 60524 Corequisites: STEM 60513 and STEM 60525

This is the final course in the 3-course STEM methods sequence for candidates in the Mathematics Specialization in the
Master of Arts in STEM Education program. Grounded in relevant research in mathematics and STEM education with
implications for teaching practice and national and state mathematics standards, the course continues to build on teaching
models that support good mathematics teaching practices. In addition, this course explores contemporary issues in
mathematics and STEM education. Course activities and assignments and directly connected to the co-req residency
experiences. This course is offered annually during the Spring semester.

END

STEM 60504:

Professional Seminar for STEM Educators

Prerequisites: B- or higher in STEM 60513 and STEM 60503and STEM 60525 or STEM 60523

This is the capstone course in the MA in STEM Education and will prepare candidates for their teaching positions by
focusing on issues critical to new teachers. The course is designed to support candidates in their final transition from
teacher candidate to teacher. Topics include understanding school climate, developing a professional development plan,
developing a plan for communicating with families, planning for the first six weeks (or unit) of school, and preparing for a
substitute teacher.

END

Teaching STEM in Diverse Settings

STEM 60510:

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the MA in STEM Education

This course will enable STEM Education candidates to gain a multifaceted understanding of the individual and
institutional elements that impact student achievement in STEM. Candidates will investigate the role that gender, SES,
race, ethnicity, home language, religion, and other identity-based aspects shape school experiences, learning, and
achievement in STEM. Candidates will then learn about specific approaches and instructional practices that they can use in
the classroom to promote learning for nonmainstream students, including teaching academic language, differentiating
instruction and assessments, and supporting home, community and school partnerships.

END

STEM: Clinical Practice I

STEM 60512:

Prerequisites: B- or higher in:STEM 60501, STEM 60510 (STEM 60502 or STEM 60522) Corequisites: STEM 60524

This course serves as the first semester of the yearlong teacher residency required for candidates in the MA in STEM
Education. Each resident is placed in a middle or high school and attends that placement 3 full days per week during the Fall
semester. Using both Rowan and placement school district measures of teaching effectiveness, supervisors will evaluate
residents on demonstrated mastery of subject area content, lesson planning, and multiple instructional strategies to meet
varied student needs and demonstrated ability to assess learner progress and modify instruction accordingly, manage all
aspects of classroom activity, and work collaboratively with all instructional, administrative, parental, and community
members of the classroom and school community. Candidates will attend their field placement 4 full days per week during
the Fall semester.

END

STEM: Clinical Practice II

STEM 60513:

Prerequisites: B- or higher in: (STEM 60523 or STEM 60503) (STEM 60522 or STEM 60502) STEM 60512 and STEM
60524; Corequisites: STEM 60525

This is the second of the two field experiences required for candidates in the MA in STEM Education. Continuing in their
field placement from STEM Education Residency I, candidates will attend their field placements 4 full days per week during
the Spring semester. Using both Rowan and placement school district measures of teaching effectiveness, supervisors will
evaluate residents on requires demonstrated mastery of subject area content, lesson planning, and multiple instructional
strategies to meet varied student needs and demonstrated ability to assess learner progress and modify instruction
accordingly, manage all aspects of classroom activity, and work collaboratively with all instructional, administrative,
parental, and community members of the classroom and school community. The course will run from January through June
to enable candidates to engage in all end-of-year activities at their residency sites.

END

STEM: Teaching & Research Methods II: Science

STEM 60522:

Prerequisites: STEM 60501 and (STEM 60512 and 60524 can be taken concurrently)

This is the second course in the 3-course STEM methods sequence for candidates in the Master of Arts in STEM
Education program. Grounded in national and state science standards, the course introduces teaching models that support
good science teaching practices. Courses activities and assignments are directly connected to the co-req residency
experiences. The course will help prepare pre-service science teachers to develop STEM pedagogy in the teaching of
science. This course is offered annually during the Fall semester.

END

STEM: Teaching & Research Methods III: Science

STEM 60523:

Prerequisites: B- or higher in STEM 60522 and STEM 60512 and STEM 60524; Corequisites: STEM 60513 and STEM 60525

This is the final course in the 3-course STEM methods sequence for science candidates in the Master of Arts in STEM
Education program. Grounded in relevant research in science teaching, this course continues to build on teaching models
that support good science teaching practices. In addition, this course explores contemporary issues in science and STEM
education. Course activities and assignments are directly connected to the co-req residency experiences. This course is
offered annually during the Spring semester. Upon completion of the course, candidates will demonstrate the ability to: Set
long and short-term learning goals for students referenced to external benchmark; Appraise, choose, and modify tasks and
texts for a specific learning goal; Design a sequence of lessons toward a specific learning goal; Select and use particular
methods to check understanding and monitor student learning; Compose, select, interpret, and use information from
methods of summative assessment; Analyze instruction for the purpose of improving it; Communicate with other
professionals

END

Introduction to Bioarchaeology

ANTH 02200:

This course introduces students to bioarchaeology- the study of human, animal, and other biological remains in the
archaeological context. Through lectures, readings, discussions, and hands-on activities, students will learn how the analysis
of skeletal remains, and their burial and temporal contexts, can aid in the reconstruction of past cultural adaptations and
evolution, and interpret patterns of subsistence, diet, disease, demography, biological variation, and physical activity. The
course also promotes understanding of the ethics of working with archaeological and historical human remains, explores
different case studies of bioarchaeological discoveries and their significance, and explores the legal implications of
bioarchaeological finds and studies in the United States and abroad.

END

ANTH 02202:

This course presents cultural anthropology as a coherent system of data and theory designed to explain the variety of
human group behavior, giving special emphasis to the structure and function of non-western cultures.

Introduction To Cultural Anthropology

END

ANTH 02203:

This course covers the rudiments of archeological field techniques, methods of analysis and dating methods.

Introduction To Archeology

END

Mummies and Burial Practices of Ancient Cultures

ANTH 02205:

This course examines the scientific and cultural dimensions of artificially treated and naturally formed human and animal
mummies of ancient cultures. Through a variety of readings and class activities, students will examine mummification
processes and burial practices, and identify where in the world mummies have been found, how they are studied
scientifically, what environmental factors promote mummification, how intentional human manipulation affects the
process, and what the different forms of mummification uncover about the cultural practices and beliefs of ancient peoples.

END

Natives of South America

ANTH 02210:

The pre-history and cultures of native South Americans are examined in this course via the archeological record and
ethnographic accounts. The concepts of culture, cultural evolution, and adaptation are emphasized while undertaking a
comprehensive survey of the diverse native South American societies and their environments. This course is offered
annually.

END

Medical Anthropology

ANTH 02215:

This course surveys the evolutionary, ecological, cultural, and political factors affecting patterns and experiences of health,
disease, and healing in past and present societies. Students will examine recent research on contemporary medical and social
concerns such as HIV in Africa and medical communication issues with immigrant populations in the U.S. This course is
ideal for students who plan future careers in the medical and helping professions, providing them with the fundamental skills
necessary to be culturally competent health professionals.

END

Human Variation

ANTH 02221:

In this course, the genetic, immunological, anatomical and physiological variation among modern populations of humans
across the globe is examined. The course will enable students to explain human biological adaptation to the biocultural
environments in which they live, as well as to understand environmental influences on the human life cycle such as on
fertility, growth, and longevity. No pre-reqs

END

Arts and Medicine

ANTH 02225:

This course will introduce students to the ways in which the arts - - dance, drama, music, art, and poetry - - are a part of
therapeutic encounters in a variety of sociocultural contexts. Students will explore how the arts are employed in the
diagnosis of disease, facilitate the creative expression of the illness experience, and motivate "healing" through
self-transformational processes. Ethnographic films and experiential exercises led by guest speakers who incorporate the
arts in therapeutic practice will complement the lectures and reading materials. Students will also engage in their own
ethnographic research on the aesthetic aspects of medical practices.

END

Food and Culture

ANTH 02240:

Food is a universal, yet highly diverse, feature of the human condition. Foodways function to create social unity, but also to
distinguish cultures. How and why do cultures develop unique methods of food preparation and consumption? How do food
rules develop and how are they maintained? The goal of this class is to gain an understanding of foodways in different
cultures and how food habits function beyond providing calories and sustenance. The course uses information from
biological anthropology, archaeology, cultural anthropology, and human ecology to understand the historical development
of foodways and modern cultural variation in food habits in different areas of the world. It also examines issues related to
modern disparities in health and nutrition in light of globalization and the political, technological, and environmental
factors that result in differential production and access to food resources. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Sport and Culture

ANTH 02245:

Sport, games, and competition serve as a nexus for humanity's innate fascination with movement and social activity. These
social activities (competition, play, martial arts, etc.) have served throughout history to encourage the proliferation of
human culture for any number of exclusive or inclusive motivations: money, fame, health, spirituality, or social and cultural
solidarity. This course examines the role of sport in human culture. The dynamics of race, gender, politics, sexuality,
mythmaking, celebrity, national identity, and international relations all can be examined through the study of how sports are
developed and played within and between cultures.

END

Introduction to Anthropological Linguistics

ANTH 02250:

Students in this interdisciplinary course will engage in the scientific study of language with particular reference to the
relationships among the languages, thoughts, and cultures of speech communities living all over the world, including within
the United States, France, India, Canada, Spain, Japan and Peru, among others. Additional course topics include the process
of human language acquisition, structures of human language, bilingualism and the ways in which race, class, gender, and
other social characteristics may be displayed through the use of language. This course is offered every other year, beginning
in 2009.

END

New World Archaeology

ANTH 02270:

Prerequisites: ANTH 02203 with minimum grade of C-

This course covers the prehistoric and early historic cultural adaptations of the native peoples of the Americas. Emphases
will be placed upon: current research trends and findings particularly in the last three decades; prehistoric cultural ecology;
culture change and culture process; and current new and traditional controversies, from the earliest Native American
hunter-gatherers to settled societies, animal and plant domestication, to the impact of colonization, and the impact of
archaeological conservation. Students will research articles on discoveries and debates, prepare a research report, and apply
learned archaeological methods in a simulated excavation. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Anthropology of Race and Ethnicity

ANTH 02275:

This course focuses on the historical development and current status of the race concept, a purported descriptor of human
diversity and potential. Using the perspectives of four-field anthropology, this course covers the historical development of
the race concept as well as current scholarship, controversies and consequences of race. Students will read relevant texts
from biological anthropology, linguistics, cultural anthropology and archaeology.

END

Old World Archeology

ANTH 02280:

Prerequisites: ANTH 02203 with minimum grade of C-

This course will explore the ancient cultures of the Old World from an archaeological perspective. Possible topics include,
but are not limited to, European Prehistory, Ancient Egypt, Archaeology of Greece and Rome, African Prehistory, Indus
Valley Prehistory, and the Prehistory of China. Emphases will be placed upon: current research trends and findings
particularly in the last three decades; prehistoric cultural ecology; culture change and culture process; and current new and
traditional controversies, from the earliest hunter-gatherers to settled societies, animal and plant domestication, to the
impact of civilizations and empires, and the impact of archaeological conservation. Students will research articles on
discoveries and debates, prepare a research report, and apply learned archaeological methods in a simulated excavation. This
courses will be offered annually.

END

Museum Studies

ANTH 02290:

This course provides an introduction to the history, purposes, and internal workings of museums from an anthropological
perspective. Students will learn how museums that focus on natural history and cultural history related to the
anthropological studies of archaeology, human evolution, and world ethnography operate in both physical museum exhibit
space and virtually on the worldwide web. It will cover the relevance of anthropological training to careers in the museum
field, as well as the importance of conducting anthropological investigations in the museum environment. This course will
be offered annually.

END

Introduction to Qualitative Research

ANTH 02295:

This course will introduce students to the current methods and theories of qualitative analysis in social science research
and will prepare students to be able to do entry-level work in research settings in a variety of fields including economics,
political science, sociology, anthropology, medicine, education, and engineering. This course will be offered annually.

END

Human Evolution

ANTH 02301:

Prerequisites: (ANTH 02201 OR ANTH 02221 with minimum grade of C-) OR BIOL 02100 OR BIOL01104 ORBIOL 01110 OR
BIOL 01113 OR BIOL 01310

Students of Human Evolution will study anthropological genetics and, evolutionary theory, basics of primate and human
skeletal anatomy, dating and excavation techniques and the fossil evidence of hominid evolution from 7 million years ago to
the present. Recent discoveries and controversies will be discussed and evaluated. The course will be offered annually.

END

Primatology

ANTH 02305:

Prerequisites: ANTH 02221 or BIOL 0100 or BIOL 01104 or BIOL 01110 or BIOL 01113 or biol 01310 or ANTH 02301 or INTR
01144 or BIOL 20150

This course introduces students to our closest living relatives, the primates. Students will study evolutionary theory,
primate evolution and adaptation, primate skeletal anatomy, dating techniques, and the fossil evidence of primate evolution
from the first true primates that evolved in the beginning of the Eocene Epoch to the Miocene. The course uses concepts
from evolutionary biology and the scientific method to explore the diverse anatomical and behavioral adaptations of
different primate species, and provides an evolutionary and ecological framework with which to understand ancient and
modern primates.

END

Native North America

ANTH 02310:

This is an ethnographic and archaeological survey of the native peoples of North America, emphasizing cultural diversity
and adaptation. The course will cover the time span from the settling of North America to the present. It analyzes the
present-day problems of reservation life, the contributions of Native Americans, and the Native American’s place in society.
Students will analyze issues affecting Native North Americans.

END

People and Cultures of Africa

ANTH 02311:

This is an ethnographic and archaeological survey of the peoples of Africa, emphasizing cultural diversity and adaptation.
The course will cover the time span from the settling of Africa to the present. It analyzes the present-day problems of
preservation of traditional cultures and the contributions of African peoples to world cultures. Students will analyze issues
affecting African peoples. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Anthropological Perspectives on Physical Growth and Development.

ANTH 02312:

This course will introduce students to anthropological perspectives on the study of the human life cycle, examining how
environmental conditions as well as cultural beliefs and practices affect physical, cognitive, and social development
throughout the lifespan. Students will also learn about unique traditions of societies around the world regarding pregnancy,
childbirth, infancy and childhood, parenting, adolescence, adulthood, middle-age, and aging. This course is offered annually
and will be of particular value to students planning to work in psychology, education, nursing, social work, or medicine.

END

ANTH 02315:

Forensic Anthropology

Prerequisites: ANTH 02221 with minimum grade of C- OR BIOL 10210

Forensic Anthropology employs the methods of physical anthropology and archeology to identify human skeletal remains.
Proper excavation technique for recovery of remains in order to fulfill the requirements of the legal system will be taught.
Students will learn to determine age, sex, height, life history, cause of and time since death and population affinity from the
human skeleton. There is a weekly Friday morning laboratory session in addition to classes. A weekend day-long excavation
is required. Grading is based on homework, a case report, performance on exams and a final paper. This course may not be
offered annually.

END

Cultural Ecology

ANTH 02321:

Prerequisites: ANTH 02202 with minimum grade of C-

This course examines the relation of human groups to their environments as mediated by culture. It emphasizes the
interaction of significant variables in the natural habitat, technology, and social institutions. This course may not be offered
annually.

END

Sex And Sex Roles in a Cross Cultural Perspective

ANTH 02322:

Prerequisites: ANTH 02202 with minimum grade of C-

This course examines the impact of sexuality on the structure of human cultures, and on how sexuality and gendered
behavior are expressed and employed in different cultural contexts. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Anthropology of Magic and Religion

ANTH 02323:

This course examines the diversity of magical and religious beliefs in human cultures and explores how religious systems are
interconnected with environment, economics, politics, and family structures. Course material emphasizes use of a
comparative approach to explore the relationship between culture, magico-religious practices, and spirituality. The course
will be offered annually.

END

Archaeological Field Methods

ANTH 02324:

Prerequisites: ANTH 02203

This course will introduce students to the practical and important elements of archaeological fieldwork. Students will be
trained in excavation, on-site cataloguing, site and unit mapping, archaeological site testing, archaeological photography,
and other important field techniques. Basic laboratory techniques in how to identify cultural remains, catalogue and prepare
finds for storage, and perform basic artifact analysis will be acquired. In addition to on-site training, the class will involve
lectures on regional pre-history, history, and field trips to cultural sites and museums.

END

The Maya

ANTH 02326:

Prerequisites: ANTH 02202 OR ANTH 02310 with minimum grade of C-

This course traces the development of Maya culture from its earliest archaeological evidence to the eve of Old World
contact, focusing on its adaptation to a variety of ecological settings, its interaction with other Mesoamerican cultures, the
development and transformation of city states, Mayan cosmology and world view, and the development of an indigenous
system of writing. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Archaeology of Ancient Egypt

ANTH 02335:

Prerequisites: ANTH 02203

This course gives students a broad overview of the archaeology of ancient Egypt from the Predynastic to the Greco-Roman
Period (3500-31 BC). Using the archaeological record, this course explores Egyptian gods, animal deities, divine kings,
pyramids, temples, mummification, society, government, and crafts. The course deals with ancient Egyptians’ beliefs about
identity, religion, medicine, magic, sex, childbirth, slavery, and death through a focus on material culture and social agency.
Current issues of heritage, conservation & repatriation as well as colonial European interpretations of this African
civilization will also be addressed.

END

Visual Culture of Ancient Egypt

ANTH 02336:

This course examines the art of ancient Egypt from the Pre-Dynastic Period through the end of the New Kingdom by
studying sculpture, relief, painting, and minor/luxury arts. The class will explore questions in regards to stylistic and
iconographic changes by setting the monuments and objects within their cultural context. Students will examine questions
of how the Egyptians interpreted the human figure and landscape; absorbed foreign influences; and what impact did other
Bronze Age cultures have on Egyptian art. Other issues under study will include past and current views and interpretations
of Egyptian Art in the museum setting and how its study impacts the ways the public thinks of ancient culture.

END

ANTH 02350:

Students conduct a survey and comparative study of a variety of cultures around the world, analyzing both cultural forms
and the methods used by anthropologists to study them. This course may not be offered annually.

Comparative Cultures

END

Global Health in Anthropological Perspective

ANTH 02355:

This course provides an introduction and overview of the interdisciplinary field of global health. Based on the principle
that population-level patterns and individual experiences of health and disease are affected by both global and local forces
(sociocultural, political-economic, biological, and environmental), this course takes an in-depth case study approach to
contemporary issues to analyze interconnections between local, national, and international health problems including health
equity, gender and health, pandemics and epidemics, and non-communicable chronic diseases.

END

Anthropological Approaches to Global Development

ANTH 02371:

Prerequisites: ANTH 02202 OR SOC 08120 with minimum grade of C-

Using a sociocultural approach emphasizing both the theoretical and applied aspects (i.e. the "anthropology of
development"), this course covers globalization, global inequality, development policy and local culture change in the 20th
and 21st centuries. Specific topics addressed will include conservation, resource management, disease emergence and
identity preservation using ethnographic research and anthropological insights to understand issues in these areas.
Recommended for students considering careers with multinational corporations, foreign service, U.N., NGOs, etc. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

Anthropology of Media

ANTH 02375:

Using anthropological theory and principles, this course gives students an overview of the effects that mass media have on
human societies, both industrialized and non-industrialized, as well as societies that are “developed” and “developing.” It
covers popular and scientific depictions of non-Western versus Western societies as well as media use cross culturally. It
includes a brief overview of basic anthropological concepts (so that an anthropology background is not required) and
outlines a basic framework with which we can use these to understand media. Students learn how anthropologists have used
media technologies to study human cultures. The course also looks at media use by indigenous peoples and other traditional
anthropological subjects.

END

Anthropology Through Film

ANTH 02376:

Anthropology Through Film is an examination of anthropological principles through the viewing, discussion and analysis
of ethnographic, documentary and fiction films. Topics covered will include ethnocentrism and cultural relativism, culture
change and development, inequality and oppression, and the relationship of filmmakers and/or scientists to subjects and
informants.

END

Public Archaeology

ANTH 02378:

Prerequisites: ANTH 02203

Course focuses on the role of museums, federal and state agencies, cultural resource management firms, indigenous people,
and amateur archaeologists in producing and sharing knowledge about the past. The course reviews the legislation that
shapes archaeological practice, media representations of archaeology and archaeologists, career paths and preparation in
public archaeology, archaeological ethics, outreach and education to share archaeological knowledge with the public,
community partnerships between archaeologists and the public, looting and destruction of cultural heritage, amateur
archaeologists, and heritage tourism. All sections emphasize the importance of civic engagement which is necessary to
disseminate archaeological knowledge by considering alternative views and the impacts of archaeological research on
different communities.

END

Anthropological Theory

ANTH 02395:

Prerequisites: (COMP 01112 and ANTH 02202 and ANTH 02203) or ANTH 02221 or ANTH 02250

This course introduces students to the major theories and debates that inspire and inform anthropological analysis by
investigating a range of theoretical propositions concerning topics including agency, structure, history, biology, ecology,
social change, power, material culture, and the politics of representation. Each theory will be examined in terms of its
analytical and explanatory power for understanding human behavior within its cultural context. Student will also examine
theoretical positions within the social and historical contexts that produced them and contexts that are contributing to
current dialogues and debate in anthropology.

END

Field Methods in Egyptology

ANTH 02400:

Prerequisites: ANTH 02203 OR ANTH 02290 OR ANTH 02336

Field Methods in Egyptology trains students in the research, examination, and evaluation of archaeological data
(architecture, artifacts, art) that can be applied to specific cultural questions. Through readings and lectures on synthetic
topics of Egyptian cultural development, students will develop research questions before traveling to Egypt to visit a variety
of archaeological sites and museums. While in Egypt, students will gather data that supports or challenges their thesis
through the collection of photographs and field notes. While in Egypt and upon returning to Rowan, students will be asked
to use their observations and evidence in conjunction with library research to publish their findings on the MARU blog.

END

Psychological Anthropology

ANTH 02420:

This course examines the diverse and complex ways that cultural factors influence an individual’s sense of self and social
identity. Students will learn about the main theoretical and empirical developments in the field of psychological
anthropology (past and present), explore cultural beliefs and practices related to mental health, and gain an understanding of
ethnographic and life history approaches to psychological research. The course is offered annually.

END

Anthropology Senior Seminar - WI

ANTH 02450:

This seminar is a capstone experience designed for Anthropology majors focusing on the integration of core knowledge
from the subfields of anthropology and their application to prehistorical, historical, and contemporary topics. Students will
engage in oral discussions and presentations as well as written exercises, essays, and a guided capstone project to
demonstrate an understanding of the anthropological perspective and theoretical approaches and methods. The course also
addresses professional opportunities for anthropologists and provides career development opportunities for Anthropology
majors. The substantive focus of the seminar will vary by instructor.

END

ANTH 02491:

Students have an opportunity to pursue individual specialized topics under the guidance of a staff member. This course
may not be used as a substitute for a course offered by the department. This course may not be offered annually.

Independent Study in Anthropology

END

Undergraduate Research Seminar in Anthropology: Special Topics

ANTH 02492:

Students participate in planning a research project, collecting data and preparing a report suitable for publication. Subjects
of research (e.g., applied anthropology, Egyptology, theory, current issues and controversies, visual anthroplogy) are selected
according to student interest. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Incident Command: Theory & Practice

DPEM 00211:

Incident Command System (ICS) organization is at the heart of emergency management. Following the National Incident
Management System (NIMS), this course will focus on ICS fundamentals, incident/event assessment, unified command
structures, incident resource management, planning process, demobilization, transfer of command, and close out. The
National Incident Management System (NIMS) is a critical component in managing an emergency incident. Furthermore,
this course will emphasize the different stages in which the Incident Command System (ICS) can expand and retract
depending on the complexity of the incident, recognize the importance of an effective management system, and give the
students the ability to recognize, exercise, and understand the various components of the ICS system.

END

Search and Rescue Operations: Wilderness and Natural Environments

DPEM 00222:

The Search and Rescue Operations: Wilderness and Natural Environments course is designed for emergency response
personnel or activities coordinators who want to understand the scope of a search or rescue mission. While the course will
employ the wilderness and natural environments in Southern New Jersey, different search and rescue environments will be
introduced. Additionally, topics in this course will include, but are not limited to: components of search and rescue, land
navigation and orienteering, communications, search and rescue systems, search and rescue theory, interviewing, incident
command, direction finding, and the development a search capability. This course will require twelve (12) hours of additional
field experience.

END

DPEM 00240:

Diverse Populations, Inclusion, and Understanding Bias for First Responders

This course reviews the social science literature on intergroup bias (stereotyping, prejudice, and discrimination), with a
heavy emphasis on diverse populations and implicit bias from a multidisciplinary perspective. This course will explore topics
such as social and cognitive aspects of bias, the influence of culture, society, economics, gender, ability, functional needs,
and race. The aim of the course is to establish a firm, social scientific understanding of the nature of intergroup bias in order
to promote nondiscriminatory behaviors, attitudes, and policies within the context of the first responder and public safety
communities.

END

Global Catastrophes

DPEM 00280:

This course examines the impact of natural and technological disasters around the globe from a cross-cultural
interdisciplinary perspective, including hurricanes, droughts, disease outbreaks, nuclear disasters, earthquakes, etc. The
course will focus on global, national, regional, and local patterns of development, examining the social, geographical, and
cultural factors that put people differentially at risk before, during, and after disasters. Using a case study approach, students
will explore how vulnerable social groups are affected by and cope with hazardous conditions and events, as well as study the
capacities of these groups that foster resilience.

END

Drones: Foundations, Design, and Maintenance

DPEM 00282:

This course offers an introduction to using unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV), commonly known as drones. The course is
designed to give the student the foundational knowledge to safely operate and maintain UAVs for recreational and
professional use. Emphasis is placed on the Federal Aviation Administration's Part 107 material related to safety, flying,
weather, pilot-in-command responsibilities and becoming licensed to use drones for commercial purposes (should the
student pursue the FAA Part 107 exam beyond this course of study). As part of this class, students will receive supervised
structured flight time where possible.

END

U.S. Military Commands and Disaster Relief Operations

DPEM 00290:

This course examines the impact and role of the United States military from the context of disaster response to natural,
technological and human-induced events in the United States and in international contexts. The course will focus on
response operations to include the National Guard (Title 32), active duty (Title 10) and the reserve military components.
Using a case study approach, students will explore how the response as the United States' military and civilian authorities
interact as part of a disaster response or humanitarian relief efforts from multiple perspectives including, but not limited to
legal, policy, ethical, logistical, and human rights considerations.

END

Bioterrorism and Weapons of Mass Destruction

DPEM 00300:

This introductory course provides an overview of the different agents of biological, chemical and nuclear weapons of mass
destruction. The intelligence preparation for vulnerability analyses from nuclear, biological and chemical weapons including
low-level radiation, depleted uranium, toxic industrial chemical concerns and vulnerability reduction measures that can be
implemented for population protection are also addressed.

END

Humanitarian Response: Evacuation and Shelter Management

DPEM 00321:

Disasters, crisis and civil unrest pose chronic threats to human security. Such events stretch governments’ capacity and
diminish the effectiveness of existing systems to offer humanitarian assistance and the potential of new technologies to
transform humanitarian response. The course will highlight evacuation processes and shelter management across multiple
contexts including: immediate crisis, short-term/long-term sheltering, special needs sheltering, medical sheltering, and
refugee sheltering. This course is an in-depth analysis of the complex ethical and resource issues along with the management
skills needed to engage in humanitarian work across a variety of settings. The course will focus on “real-world” scenarios that
arise in the field.

END

Technology and Border Surveillance in Homeland Security

DPEM 00325:

This course provides a comprehensive, overview of border security from an all-hazards perspective as a fundamental
component of Homeland Security, critical infra-structure, and the gathering of intelligence as a part of how technologies
and societies interact to produce security. Moreover, students will review the roles and responsibilities of government
agencies, non-government organizations, and individual citizens’ role in border surveillance along ports of entry and
non-ports of entry within a Homeland Security context.

END

Search and Rescue: Management and Lost Person Behavior

DPEM 00333:

Prerequisites: DPEM 00222

The Search and Rescue: Management and Lost Person behavior course, designed for emergency response personnel or
activities coordinators, goes beyond the fundamentals of the wilderness and natural environments course. The primary focus
of this course is to engage the participant in a series of exercises and skills-building activities while simultaneously
integrating the core leadership skills needed to activate, maintain, and deactivate a search and rescue experience, public
communications, lost person behavior, search team management, volunteer management, and the integration of efforts with
law enforcement and other public safety officials. Moreover, the course will discuss additional search features such as aerial
search with drones and helicopters and the use of canines to assist in the search and rescue process. This course will require
an additional fifteen (15) hours field experience.

END

Mass Casualty, Active Shooter, and Major Events Response

DPEM 00356:

This course examines Active Shooter Response (ASR) and situational awareness for emergency management planning,
which helps improve the survivability of civilians, and event attendees, while increasing the preparedness levels of trained
individuals. This course examines the principle of modern-day ASR training programs, starting with the national-level
standard of run, hide, & fight/barricade to more advanced planning and theory for major-scale events to include schools,
sporting events, stadiums, and other mass gathering venues. The theory portion of the course will focus on early ASR events
such as Columbine High School, Colorado (1999) and the Ft. Hood shooting (2009). The second part of the course will plan
an experiential exercise and evaluate the outcomes of the exercise. (An additional meeting beyond the class environment will
be needed to conduct the five-hour exercise.)

END

Research and Data Analysis in Emergency Management and Homeland Security

DPEM 00370:

Prerequisites: DPEM 00101

This course provides basic research methods skills for addressing emergency management and homeland security issues in
the field in the areas of research planning, basic statistical methods, primary and secondary data collection, and qualitative
data analysis methods and how these methods relate to the larger field of social science research. This course prepares
students for intermediate and advanced emergency management, homeland security and intelligence methods. Moreover,
this course provides an overview of basic approaches used to understand research, data analysis and evaluation strategies
aimed at determining program effectiveness.

END

Drone Applications in Emergency Management

DPEM 00380:

Prerequisites: GEOG 16160

This course is designed to help students understand the multiple uses of drones within the first responder agencies for
emergency, surveillance, inspection, and general purposes including: investigating and assessing fires, law enforcement,
search and rescue operations, emergency response, traffic investigations, and HAZMAT operations. In this class, students
will refine navigation, drone video, and drone photography skills necessary to understand critical infrastructure inspection
processes, data collection, and evidence collection.

END

Drones: Legal, Ethical, and Security Issues

DPEM 00381:

Prerequisites: DPEM 00282

This course is designed to underscore the ethical concerns and/or issues that must be addressed or at least communicated
with the drone pilots-in-command to ensure adherence to state, local and federal laws, professional ethics, and drone
security protocols. These concerns include the adherence to a professional Code of Ethics to ensure the ethical, legal, and
safe maintenance of drones and an understanding of which technologies can be restricted for use by the United States
government for purposes that threaten the homeland security, public safety, and violate lawful usages.

END

Natural and Technological Hazards: Mitigation and Response

DPEM 00391:

Emergency management, at its core, encompasses the recognition and management of natural disasters, technological
disasters, and Na-Tech (hybrid) disasters. This course examines different types of natural hazards and integrates
perspectives on risk, vulnerability, resilience, and mitigation planning through an examination of natural and technological
hazards including earthquakes, tsunamis, volcanoes, floods, landslides, hurricanes, tornadoes, wildfires, climate change, and
a host of technological and human-induced hazards. Moreover, the class underscores the basic tenets of emergency
management as a set of diverse responses to various emergencies from the federal, state, and local perspectives, the
management of mass casualties, and ways to rebuild more resilient communities following a disaster.

END

Health Operations Management

DPEM 00412:

This course will introduce students to fundamental operations management principles in the health care setting with
specific operations management approaches employed across a range of health care settings to include clinical, management
and support processes in the medical and public health system. Key to this course will be the identification of operations
management issues and the use of techniques to help healthcare leaders make informed management decisions and apply
techniques to build and maintain a productive health care organization.

END

Health Care Organization Leadership

DPEM 00422:

This course provides an introduction and overview to leadership, management, and organizational behavior in health care,
reflecting the uniqueness of this sector. By integrating theory with practice, students gain a better understanding of the
sector from different organizational perspectives. Finally, the course examines the complex healthcare industry, with
specific emphasis on emergency medical services, and the challenges facing its leaders at all levels of the healthcare sector
including departments, laboratories, units, emergency medical units, clinics/hospitals or residential/outpatient care facilities.

END

Grant Acquisition and Administration for Emergency Managers

DPEM 00429:

This course will help to develop the skills and knowledge to construct and manage grant proposals. This course offers
students an opportunity to understand the grant lifecycle for government, non-profit grant, and corporate grant acquisition
processes and management.

END

Global Disaster Risk Management

DPEM 00431:

In an age of heightened uncertainty and risks, the increasing frequency and scale of the crisis and disaster-related issues
stemming from natural disasters, technological disasters, terrorism, disease outbreaks, geopolitical instability, civil unrest,
and financial instability pose significant vulnerabilities to humanity. The use of risk analytics, risk reduction theory, and
disaster reduction frameworks are becoming an indispensable tool needed to guide efforts that promote global security and
a sustainable future. This course is designed to introduce students to the global risk reduction field and technology within
emergency management used to reduce and manage risk patterns, trends, and progress in disaster risk reduction while
evaluating strategic plans to reduce natural hazards, technological, and human-induced hazards affecting the international
community.

END

Public Health Emergency Preparedness and Response

DPEM 00442:

This course provides training and education on public health preparedness and response to large-scale emergencies and
disasters. Students will be introduced to the knowledge, skills, capabilities, and behaviors required for competency in public
health preparedness and emergency response and become familiar with the major categories and classification of disaster
events, including weapons of mass destruction. Other course topics include how the public health system integrates with the
National Response Plan and Framework to ensure effective preparedness and response to large-scale emergencies and
disasters. Furthermore, students will discuss Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment (THIRA) and its role
in determining community vulnerabilities and understand how to implement and evaluate public health emergency
preparedness and response plan elements.

END

Emerging Health Threats: Risks and Surveillance

DPEM 00444:

This course will focus on the risk and surveillance of infectious diseases as part of an overall disaster preparedness and
emergency response operations plan both nationally and internationally. Students will understand various types of public
health interventions to address the rapid spread of disease. Case studies will be used to illustrate emergency management
approaches to threats from infectious diseases and other strategies deployed to understand and control disease emergence
and spread. Principles of ethical practice, treatment of infectious population, and quarantine will also be examined.

END

Counterterrorism and National Security Issues: Theory and Practice

DPEM 00451:

Prerequisites: DPEM 00300 or DPEM 00420 or LAWJ 05326 or DPEM 00101

This course conceptualizes a terror attack as a human-induced disaster and employs emergency management principles and
strategies to respond to terrorism with counterterrorism measures at every stage of the disaster cycle. Moreover, the course
provides students an opportunity to develop a more complete picture of the complex security challenges that can pose
significant threats to civilians. This course takes into full consideration the national, regional, and international security
issues and implications of an effective emergency response through the application of the incident command system model
to formulating and implementing strategies in contingency planning, hazard and risk assessment, joint operations,
mitigation, and policy to respond to terrorism activities.

END

Advanced Topics in Emergency Management Homeland Security

DPEM 00480:

Prerequisites: DPEM 00101

This course provides a seminar experience in areas of emergency management that are not a part of the recurring course
offerings, with an emphasis on student participation. Consult the Master Schedule each semester for specific topics related
to emergency management being offered. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Intelligence Analysis: Global Areas Threat Assessment

DPEM 00492:

Prerequisites: DPEM 00420 or Permission of Instructor

This course addresses the need to integrate intelligence data from various global regions to foster an understanding of risk
adaptation strategies and risk management in dynamic environments while addressing security and emergency response
challenges in different world areas. The emphasis of the course will center on threat assessment of various factors including
economic, geopolitical, and social-civil unrest among state and non-state actors from the following areas of focus: The
Americas, Europe, Asia-Pacific, The Middle East, and Africa.

END

DPEM 00631:

Security, Securitization, and Migration in Emergency Management and Homeland Security

This course addresses the impact of international migration and its implications for crisis management and national
security. Students will critically analyze migration-related security and securitization as part of regional, national, and local
crisis management responses to migrants, refugees, and displaced persons. Moreover, this course examines various historical
and contemporary cases of displacement, integrating diverse disciplinary approaches, including legal, political, social,
cultural, and moral analysis. Key to this course will be the analysis of violent extremism and terrorism in security and
migration flows and the roles governments, international organizations, and non-governmental organizations play to ensure
security.

END

Emergency Exercises-Design, Implementation and Evaluation

DPEM 43355:

Prerequisites: DPEM 43101

This course provides insight into the tasks, roles and responsibilities required to design and conduct an emergency
management exercise that is a part of a long-term, carefully constructed plan in which exercises help the community prepare
for disasters. Students will use a community needs assessment to develop the case for exercises, design an exercise, and
outline an evaluation plan aimed at improving competence in all emergency functions. Students will also be introduced to
the concept of a comprehensive exercise program used to improve on the four phases of emergency management. The
course instruction will follow and meet the guidelines established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency exercise
design and evaluation courses and the Department of Homeland Security Exercise and Evaluation Program.

END

Emergency Operations and Business Continuity

DPEM 43395:

Prerequisites: DPEM 00101 and DPEM 00400 or Permission of Instructor

This course provides a step-by-step approach to the development of a comprehensive emergency/disaster/crisis
management plan for organizations (e.g. manufacturing companies, corporate officers, retailers, utilities, government
agencies, or any organization where people work or gather). By analyzing how organizations prepare for, respond to, and
recover from an emergency/crisis (e.g., severe winter storm) or more localized (e.g., chemical spill, building fire), this course
emphasizes collaborative processes, applied methodologies used to plan and recover systems and processes when faced with
various types of disaster and crisis recovery scenarios that impact communities, businesses and organizations as they seek to
continue their operations. Finally, the course will emphasize how disaster preparedness directly correlates to the ability to
continue organizational operations.

END

Risk Analysis for Disaster Preparedness and Homeland Security

DPEM 43420:

Prerequisites: DPEM 43101

This course provides an analysis of vulnerability assessment as the foundation for effective hazard mitigation by
introducing and explaining various methodologies to carry out the process of vulnerability assessment. Moreover, this
course will introduce students to (1) material in the risk communication/risk perception literature; (2) basic modeling
techniques in quantitative risk assessment; (3) a risk management framework suitable for quantitative risk modeling and risk
communication, and (4) case studies related to technological hazards and natural hazards.

END

Internship in Disaster Preparedness and Emergency Management

DPEM 43495:

Prerequisites: DPEM 43101 and DPEM 43400 or Permission of Instructor

This course is designed to provide students with an experience in the profession of emergency management, homeland
security and disaster preparedness beyond that of the classroom.
NOTE: Additional placement requirements such as background checks and fingerprinting may be required.

END

Advanced Internship in Disaster Preparedness and Emergency Management

DPEM 43496:

Prerequisites: DPEM 43495

This course is designed to provide students with additional experience beyond the first Internship course in the profession
of emergency management, homeland security and disaster preparedness beyond that of the classroom. This internship need
not be a continuation of the first internship experience. NOTE: Additional placement requirements such as background
checks and fingerprinting may be required.

END

Introduction to Healthcare Management

HCM 51101:

This introductory course discusses the roles of patients, physicians, hospitals, insurers, and pharmaceutical companies
within the context of healthcare and the interaction among these groups. Students will be introduced to resource
management, managing people, complex systems, and processes within healthcare services in the changing environment of
healthcare delivery and services.

END

Healthcare Informatics

HCM 51201:

Prerequisites: HCM 51101 with concurrent registration permitted

Healthcare management professionals need to know information management practices within healthcare delivery
systems. This course will cover a variety of data management strategies and security practices that conform to HIPPA in
various healthcare settings, including: in hospitals, clinics, doctors’ offices, nursing homes, pharmacies, insurance
companies, to improve healthcare quality, respond to regulations, and contain costs. Additional topics will include, ethical
issues and the patient record, electronic health records (EHRs), data collection standards, legal aspects of health
information, medical coding, and reimbursement.

END

Strategic Management in Healthcare

HCM 51344:

Prerequisites: HCM 51101 and HCM 51201

Students will learn key principles of strategic management within a broadly-defined health care setting to include the
ongoing planning, monitoring, analysis, negotiating, problem solving, and decision making necessary within a risk-based
environment. The course examines strategic management and the role of managers at every level of healthcare organizations
designed to meet organizational goals and objectives within healthcare enterprises including: public health organizations,
physician practices and clinics, hospitals and health systems, agencies and service organizations, for-profit firms, and
not-for-profits.

END

Advanced Topics in Healthcare Management

HCM 51498:

Prerequisites: HCM 51101 and HCM 51329

This course examines a variety of emerging healthcare administration topics. These topics are drivers of the industry that
impact quality, cost transparency, consumers, strategic planning, implementation, privacy, public policy, legal regulations,
labor relations, and the role of leadership in overcoming the challenges of managing the cost of healthcare.

END

Introduction to Human Services

HSRV 01100:

Prerequisites: BA in Human Services Majors

An interdisciplinary orientation to major Human Services agencies and institutions in this region, including social work,
education, corrections, substance abuse, child welfare, mental health, recreation, geriatrics, etc. Participants will study the
roles and functions of professionals in these types of Human Services careers.

END

Field Experiences in Human Services I

HSRV 01311:

Prerequisites: HSRV 01320

This course provides students with the opportunity to be engaged in a field experience which will require them to apply the
knowledge they have gained from their previous classes focused on human services course content, theory, and research
methods. Students are required to take the course, followed by HSRV 01411 Field Experience II during the fall semester and
HSRV 01412 Field Experience III during the spring semester. The goals are understanding yourself, developing
professionalism, utilizing supervision, understanding organizational structures, and beginning to understand programmatic
effectiveness.

END

Applied Ethics in Human Services

HSRV 01320:

Applied Ethics in Human Services provides an in-depth analysis of human services ethics, application of the National
Organization of Human Services (NOHS) Code of Ethics, and concepts and dilemmas specific to service relationships.
From a foundation in multicultural values, the course investigates the issues of responsible practice through critical analysis
and discussion. The student will apply decision making skills and critical analysis to professional situations where standards
conflict. Topics include: confidentiality, duty to warn, client rights, dual relationships, competence, multicultural issues,
sanity, malpractice and expert testimony.

END

Senior Seminar in Human Services

HSRV 01400:

Prerequisites: senior standing and completion of core requirements.

Senior Seminar in Human Services - WI Senior Seminar constitutes the capstone experience for students
majoring in Human Services and represents the culminating exit course for students. This course is a writing intensive
experience designed to help students integrate their classroom and field experience into a coherent sense of human services
as a profession as well as a sense of the student's personal commitment to the values and ethics of the profession. As a
culminating experience, this course is based on a portfolio created from the experience the student has accrued during
his/her participation in both the academic and experiential components of the major. 

END

Introduction to Child Abuse, Protection and Permanency Planning

HSRV 01403:

Prerequisites: (HSRV 01320 AND HSRV 01100) OR (LAWJ 43303)

This course will examine the sociological constructs which create a "determination of abuse" and the interventions
established in the social systems that surround this social problem. Introduction to Child Protection & Permanency will
introduce students to the identification, investigation, placement, counseling and reunification process, including legal and
criminal coordination.

END

Field Experience in Human Services II

HSRV 01411:

Prerequisites: HSRV 01311

Field Experiences in Human Services II advances the students' learning and application from HSRV 01311 Field
Experience in Human Services I. The learning goals of this course are obtaining cultural competence, understanding the
application of ethics and ethical values, understanding communities being served, and understanding the impact of policy on
practice.

END

Human Services Field Experience in Human Services III

HSRV 01412:

Prerequisites: HSRV 01411

Field Experience in Human Services III advances the students' learning and application from HSRV 01311 Field
Experience in Human Services I and HSRV Field Experience in Human Services II. The goals of this capstone experience
course are developing ethical practice habits, understanding the ongoing requirements for learning and career paths,
understanding the legal environment in which practice takes place, and understanding resource availability and funding
streams.

END

Human Services Selected Topics

HSRV 01480:

This course will focus on various specialized topics in Human Services. Topics will vary as Rowan faculty, executives in
local, state, or federal politics, leaders of non-profit agencies, and experts in specialized human services fields may bring
current theories and conditions to the students. Students may retake this course for credit when offered by a different
instructor in a different topic.

END

Research Methods for Human Services

HSRV 08310:

Prerequisites: HSRV 0110, either STAT 02100 or STAT 02260 AND EITHER SOC 08120 or PSY 01107

This course introduces the student to the scientific methods used in the social sciences, the relationship between theory
and methodologies of data collection and analysis, the rudimentaries of basic types of data analysis and interpretation. Given
the applied nature of the human services degree, particular emphasis is placed on qualitative research methods and analyses.
This course is offered annually.

END

Introduction to Sociology

SOC 08120:

This course analyzes the characteristics of social organization and focuses on the study of social relationships and
interaction. It examines the social basis of behavior patterns, the nature of social problems and the possibilities for social
change. (Required for Sociology majors)

END

Introduction to Sociology for Premed Students

SOC 08121:

This course provides students with a general understanding of the theoretical, conceptual, and methodological approaches
to studying people in groups, institutions, societies and interpersonal interaction. It examines some of the realities of
everyday life and critically analyzes perceptions of these social phenomena. Special attention is given to understanding social
phenomena with particular relevance to health and medicine, as well as a wide range of other social arenas.

END

SOC 08130:

INTRO RES EXP-SOC

END

Identity, Culture, and Democracy: Being an American

SOC 08146:

This course strengthens writing and critical thinking skills through explorations of one's cultural history and an
investigation of American society and national identity(ies). It will acclimate students to American cultural, social and
political roots and sensitize students to patterns of difference that constitute life in the twenty-first century United States.

END

Sociology of the Family

SOC 08220:

This course examines the relationships between the family and other societal institutions as well as the related interaction
patterns within the family, both from an historical and a cross-cultural perspective. The course also includes such specific
topics as gender roles, women's movement, sexuality and social class differences.

END

Social Problems

SOC 08221:

This course examines major social problems in the society as a part of the ongoing social process, with particular reference
to their economic, political and other social roots. Topics covered can include such areas as mental illness, poverty,
structured inequality, various forms of addiction, war, racism and crime.

END

Sociology of Social Welfare

SOC 08223:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course examines the socio-historical development of social welfare, focusing upon changes in the theory and practice
of social welfare in American and other societies. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Science, Technology and Society

SOC 08228:

This course offers a guided introduction to major trajectories of theory and empirical research in the interdisciplinary field
of Science and Technology Studies (STS). Considerable attention will be devoted to exploring the nature of science and
technology, their relationships to and interactions with one another, social institutions, and the natural world, and the
influences these interactions exert in shaping what humans value. A fundamental goal of the course is to cultivate awareness
and understanding of the social organization of technology and scientific knowledge production, and the technoscientific
structuring of modern social life broadly.

END

Sociology Of Minority Groups

SOC 08230:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course analyzes the nature of the relationships among ethnic, racial and other groupings in our society. It examines
and tests sociological theories by the study of specific past and present minority group situations.

END

Self And Society

SOC 08269:

This introductory course in the study of behavior in everyday life examines the sociology of the familiar, looking at the
socialization processes, the effect of social interaction and re-socialization. The course focuses on the individual as a social
interacting organism.

END

Sexuality and Society

SOC 08281:

This course is an introduction to the sociological study of sexuality. Students will look at the ways that sexual desires, acts,
identities, and meanings are shaped and structured by the larger social world through policies, institutions, norms, and
rituals. Students will explore why discussions of sex are taboo and why sexual issues tend to be so polarizing in contemporary
American society. Furthermore, students will work to develop the skills and knowledge needed to discuss sexuality as a
social construct that shapes sexual ethics, human rights, and personal freedoms.

END

SOC 08320:

Urban Sociology

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course examines the process, conditions and problems of urbanization. It emphasizes the social phenomena of the
contemporary urban scene, the problems of mass society and their possible solution, mass organization, mass
communication and regional interdependence.

END

The Sociology of Religion

SOC 08322:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course studies sociological theories of the origin and nature of religion. It includes the relationship of religion to
family life, sexuality, ethnic identity, economic inequality and political power. Students also study conservative and radical
religious movements in contemporary society and secularization and secular substitutes for religion. This course may not be
offered annually.

END

The Sociology of Social Work

SOC 08323:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 AND SOC 08121 with minimum grades of C-

This course examines the socio-historical development of social work, giving attention to the processes of casework, group
work and community organization as well as aspects of social work as a profession. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Deviant Behavior and Social Control - WI

SOC 08325:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C- AND COMP 01112

This course explores the major theoretical and research issues in the study of deviant behavior. Then, drawing on a wide
variety of types of deviant behavior, the course studies three levels of social reality: the interpersonal, the organizational and
the structural. The course seeks to place deviant behavior within the context of traditional social processes and structures.
Writing Intensive (WI)

END

Socialization of the Child Through Adolescence - WI

SOC 08326:

Prerequisites: (SOC 08120 OR SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-) AND COMP 01112

This course focuses upon the processes and social forces which facilitate the ways in which individuals are prepared to
enter various groups within the life cycle. Writing Intensive (WI)

END

Comparative Education in Sociological Perspective

SOC 08327:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course compares the educational systems of different societies and their relationships to other social institutions in
their societies. Such features as the overall purposes and goals of education, its accessibility to different social strata, gender
differences, services to special populations in the society, and the teaching profession are compared. In each case study
studied, both unique characteristics of the educational system are highlighted as well as those similar to other societies, with
the focus on social forces which influence the makeup and functioning of different educational systems.

END

Sociology of Disasters and Crisis

SOC 08328:

This course explores disasters and emergency response via a sociological lens and examines the need to systematically
understand the social impacts of such tragic events. Participants will learn how to be better prepared to function as an
effective member of their community to enhance the chances of improving preparedness, mitigation, and response to
possible natural or technological hazards. Furthermore, this course will include discussions of disaster types, individual and
collective vulnerabilities of various populations to disasters, disaster-related organization and social policies, issues of
disaster preparedness, the media and disaster response, and challenges/opportunities of disaster recovery and prevention.

END

Social Stratification

SOC 08330:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course examines the major classic and modern theories of social stratification and analyzes the forms and functions of
social inequality in contemporary societies. It stresses the influence of class membership on individual behavior and
examines the implications of institutionalized inequalities for democratic societies.

END

Classical Sociological Theory

SOC 08331:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course studies the historical and conceptual development of the major schools of thought within the "sociological
tradition." It emphasizes an understanding of the nature of theory and systems of theory, the application of theory, the
problems inherent in theorizing about society and social life and the relations between sociological theory and research.
(Required for sociology majors)

END

Contemporary Sociological Theory

SOC 08332:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 with minimum grade of C-

Contemporary Sociological Theory covers sociological theory developed in recent times. Contemporary Sociological
Theory examines the state of the field in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, focusing on theoretical issues and
frameworks that have come to define sociology, its research and methods. It will include consideration of the Parsonian
structural functionalism of the 1950s, the critique of Positivism that emerged during the 1960s, and the fragmentation of the
field into the many current perspectives and approaches.

END

Sociology of Work

SOC 08333:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course uses sociological propositions of bureaucracy, professionalization, delegation, goal distortions and informal
organization to evaluate critically various management philosophies. It examines interdependence of structure, status,
leadership and motivation.

END

SOC 08334:

GROUP DYNAMICS

END

Sociology of Education

SOC 08336:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

The purpose of this course is to study education as a social institution and its interrelationships with other social
institutions. It focuses on how education is affected by social forces such as demographic changes, governmental policy, and
mass media; and how education itself impacts on the rest of society, such as perpetuating social inequalities.

END

Sociological Practice

SOC 08339:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course focuses on using sociological theories and concepts, research methods, and ethical decision-making processes
to solve problems. Sociological practice occurs at all levels from the individual to societal. The course links the student to a
variety of career pathways and occupational settings, including mental health, rehabilitation, work in prisons, and youth and
family services.

END

Political Sociology

SOC 08351:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course analyzes the interplay between society and politics, using both classical and contemporary perspectives.
Course topics may include: power, elites, conflict, ideology, political systems, political behavior, political organization,
political institutions and political processes and change.

END

SOC 08353:

Sociology of Complex Organizations

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course discusses the major theories and research in complex and formal organizations, giving special attention to a
variety of organizational types, including industrial, service and non-profit. It emphasizes examining varying organization
types with respect to their size, structure, environments and their dynamics of innovation and change.

END

SOC 08360:

SOCIOLOGY OF LAW

END

Sociology of Disability

SOC 08362:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

The Sociology of Disability adopts a narrative approach from the perspectives of disabled persons, based on memoirs,
short stories, and novels, which are applied to relevant sociological theories, concepts, and perspectives. Sociological issues
examined in this course include how professionals and practitioners variously define disability, the history of how
sociologists have discussed the concept, the analysis of "disabled" cultures both in the US and abroad, and the effects of the
Disability Rights Movement on selfhood and collective identity. Most importantly, the course examines how persons with
disabilities cope with devalued roles, manage stigma, and incorporate disability into identity.

END

Contemporary Jewish Life

SOC 08365:

This course focuses on contemporary Jewish life with primary focus on American Jews. Situating them in historical and
transnational context, the course will explore their significance as a diaspora community, while exploring the role of
collective memory, religion, and the construction of Jewish culture. Students will learn the who, what, where and when of
this religious/ethnic group, its diversity, and issues relating to integration and intergroup relations with the larger society.
Introduction to Sociology or Introduction to American Studies is recommended as a pre-req, but not required.

END

Sociology of Women In Society

SOC 08370:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 OR SOC 08121 with minimum grades of C-

This course investigates the role of women in society. Course topics include: Women and the Economy, Women and the
Law, Socialization into Female Sex Roles, Women and Religion and Women in Academia.

END

Sociological Research Methods

SOC 08375:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course introduces the student to the scientific methods used in the social sciences, the relationship between
sociological theory and methodologies of data collection and analysis, the rudimentaries of basic types of data analysis and
interpretation. Students will learn to read and summarize basic scientific reports, to critically analyze and evaluate reported
research findings in the social sciences, and to recognize ethical concerns associated with sociological research. (Required
for Sociology majors)

END

Social Statistics

SOC 08376:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course familiarizes the student with the basics in elementary statistical methods used in the social sciences and the
uses and misuses of statistics for various purposes. The student will learn to calculate and understand the proper use of basic
statistics commonly used in the social sciences. (Required for Sociology majors)

END

Field Research Experience

SOC 08377:

Prerequisites: SOC 08375 with minimum grade of B

This internship-based course is designed for students who are interested in careers that involve social research. Students
intern with a research group for 10 weeks, engaging in multiple stages of the research process, including the formulation of
research questions, the construction of literature reviews, the design of survey instruments and interview questionnaires, the
collection of data, and data analysis. Students are trained to recognize variation, to find and synthesize scholarship, to
conceptualize, to maximize validity, to conduct observations, and to identify patterns. They are also trained on how to
operate professionally and ethically as researchers and work professionals. Students study social research concepts and
practices in a three-week orientation module with the course instructor and classmates before the internship, and reflect on
their internship experiences with the course instructor and classmates once every two weeks during the internship.

END

Ethnic Minorities in China

SOC 08391:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This is an upper level sociology course that will acquaint students with the theoretical frameworks and methodology
procedures of ethnic and minority studies. It will introduce to students racial and ethnic compositions and characteristics of
the population of China, the administrative arrangement of areas and regions inhabited by minority nationalities and the
history and culture of these minorities. The focus of this course will be the examination of ethnic minorities from the
sociological points of view that will offer students a comparative and global perspective of ethnic studies.

END

Sociology of the Holocaust - WI

SOC 08399:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C- AND COMP 01112

This course primarily deals with structural and experiential dimensions of the genocidal process affecting the European
Jews, their ethnicity, culture and religious communality after 1933. Gypsies, Jehovah's Witnesses, prisoners of conscience,
Russian prisoners of war, the Polish intelligentsia, who with the Jews, became a subject of Nazi persecution are also among
those remembered. The Holocaust or shoah will provide a model for compassionate insight into the experience of other
persecuted ethnic and religious minorities or any who suffer disadvantage due to long-standing discrimination, such as
women and homosexuals. Special emphasis will be given to understanding the interpersonal processes which are part of
survival and transcendence of situations where we find society against the self. Writing Intensive (WI)

END

Environment, Policy and Society

SOC 08400:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course emphasizes the interaction between the social and ecological environments including: technological
mechanisms by which societies shape their environments; cultural values that cause people to use the environment in
particular ways; and policy implications that may result in social consensus or conflict concerning manipulation of the
natural environment.

END

Human Service Organizations

SOC 08401:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course will focus on the micro and macro aspects of human service organizations of various kinds; for example,
hospitals, courts, nursing homes, public agencies, schools, and the like. These organizations will be examined in terms of
their structure, delivery of services, their function of "processing" human beings, the internal and external environments in
which they operate, and the policy implications for delivery of services and organizational change.

END

Sociology of Death, Dying, and Bereavement

SOC 08403:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course provides students with an in-depth examination of the social and cultural dimensions of death, dying, and
bereavement within the United States. Cross-cultural, historical, and international perspectives are also introduced as
various theories and methods of sociology are employed to examine such issues as the meaning of death, the process of
dying, facing death across the life course, the death industry, coping with loss and grief, and the social context of death,
dying and bereavement. Instruction of the course material frequently takes an applied approach when connections are made
between theory and practice as they exist within various occupations and industries centered on death, dying, and/or
bereavement.

END

Applied Community Development

SOC 08405:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course is designed to demonstrate how social science theory and research can be applied to conduct collaborative
work between communities and academic research by identifying: 1) social, 2) economic, 3) political and 4) physical
infrastructural problems. Moreover, it is the goal of this course to work with communities by developing strategies toward
the discovery of sustainable development solutions vis-à-vis community development strategies and planning.

END

Sociology of Trauma, Illness and Mental Health

SOC 08420:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course examines sociological approaches to trauma, illness and mental health. The focus of this course will be on the
history, etiology, social responses, social factors related to mental disorders and mental health treatment associated with
illness and trauma. It surveys major perspectives and reviews the history of the perception of mental disorder in western
society. Classification, diagnosis, therapeutic approaches and institutional responses in addition to medical, legal, and social
issues related to mental health and the treatment of people with mental disorders will be addressed. While there will be
attention given to specific mental disorders, the primary considerations will cover the consequences of conceptualizations
and treatment of mental illness rather than the development of individual conditions we deem as mental disorders or
physical illnesses.

END

Social Determinants of Health: Theory, Method and Intervention

SOC 08422:

This course views disease risk beyond disease pathology and individual factors to psychological and sociological
phenomena by exploring the social and cultural determinants of health behavior with an introduction of health behavior
theories and application of interventions such as behavior change models and health program development.

END

Sociology Senior Seminar

SOC 08425:

Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C- in SOC 08120 AND SOC 08331 AND SOC 08375 AND SOC 08376

This seminar is a capstone experience designed to help students integrate what they have learned as sociology majors in a
liberal arts setting. Students will engage in oral discussions and presentations as well as written exercises and essays to
demonstrate an understanding of the sociological perspective, theoretical approaches and methods. The substantive focus
of the seminar will vary by instructor.

END

Sociology Senior Seminar - Wi

SOC 08426:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 AND Minimum grades of C- in SOC 08120 OR SOC 08121 AND SOC 08375 AND SOC 08376

This Senior Seminar is a writing intensive capstone experience designed to help students integrate what they have learned
as sociology majors in a liberal arts setting and to write at a publication-ready level within the field or for specific audiences
in different professional climates. Students will engage in oral discussions and presentations as well as written exercises and
essays, demonstrating as they do an understanding of the field, its theoretical approaches and methods. The substantive
focus of the seminar will vary by instructor. Writing Intensive (WI)

END

Senior Seminar: Sociological Imagination-WI

SOC 08427:

Prerequisites: (SOC 08120 OR SOC 08121) AND SOC 08331 with minimum grades of C- AND COMP 01112

This Senior Seminar course is for the Bachelor of Arts, Liberal Studies: Humanities/Social Science sequence, an
interdisciplinary program. It is the writing intensive component of the sociology sequence and is expected to make this
senior seminar an especially rich capstone experience, helping students develop as scholars and professionals. The
sociological imagination will be evidenced in all of a student's work for the course and be reflected in oral discussions and
presentations, as well as written exercises and essays. Writing Intensive (WI)

END

Organizational Response to Disasters and Crisis

SOC 08429:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 with minimum grade of C-

This course will help students understand the complex social organizations and organizational responses to disasters. A
secondary goal of this course is to learn to understand and utilize the vast research published in this interdisciplinary field,
while maintaining a specific focus of the sociological core of the research. Students will gain a familiarity with local, state and
federal disaster-related organizations and how they respond within the bureaucratic structure to facilitate social recovery in
the aftermath of disasters and crisis to enhance the chances of improving disaster preparedness, disaster mitigation, and
disaster response to possible natural, human-induced or technological hazards. Furthermore, this course will include
discussions of disaster-related organization and social policies, issues of disaster preparedness, the media and disaster
response and challenges/opportunities of disaster recovery and prevention.

END

Case Management Intervention in Sociological Practice

SOC 08430:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 AND SOC 08121 with minimum grades of C-

This course emphasizes effective case management practice at the micro, mezzo, and macro levels of system intervention
for populations at risk; Application of systems thinking to case management issues with individuals, families, and groups;
Issues of aging, family mental health, child welfare, adult services and health are interwoven into practice scenarios in an
effort to explore the multiple social problems faced by groups in a social service organization on a regular basis.

END

Social Psychology of City Life

SOC 08431:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This advanced course studies everyday behavior in the city. It examines the ways people experience and give meaning to
urban life, using different social-psychological conceptions and methodologies.

END

Sociology of Medicine

SOC 08436:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course analyzes medicine as a major institution in American society. It covers concepts of health and illness,
attributes of a profession, the hospital, national health care, ethical issues and biomedical research.

END

Selected Topics in Sociology

SOC 08440:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course provides a seminar experience in areas of sociology that are not a part of the recurring course offerings.
Enrollment is limited, and student participation is maximized. Consult the Master Schedule each semester for specific
topics being offered. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Sociology of Migration: Contemporary Perspectives

SOC 08441:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 OR SOC 08230 OR SOC 08121 with minimum grades of C-

This course examines the transnational journeys of migrants and refugees to the United States and provides a sociological
perspective for understanding the diverse causes, consequences and contexts of contemporary international immigration. It
provides students with a good understanding of and ability to analyze the effect of contemporary migration on American
society. It is of particular benefit to those who are likely to work with communities containing substantial numbers of
recent immigrants.

END

Environmental Justice: Race, Class, and Gender

SOC 08442:

This course examines issues of environmental equity and social justice. It examines the rights of people to live in a clean
environment free from hazardous pollution or contamination and to access the natural resources necessary to sustain health,
safety, and livelihoods. A primary focus of this course will be the topics of race, class, and gender as they relate to
environmental disputes.

END

Sociology of Ethnicity and Politics

SOC 08450:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 OR SOC 08230 OR SOC 08121 with minimum grades of C-

This course provides students with an in-depth look into the relation between ethnicity and politics. It studies ethnic
politics from the point of view of its participants by exploring their ideas and actions as well as analyzing the sociological
factors that make some social agents involved in ethnic politics more than others. The course analyzes a number of historical
and recent cases of nationalist and ethnic politics to discern the main similarities and differences among various types of
ethnic ideologies and movements.

END

Health Movements in the Americas

SOC 08451:

This course is an examination of how people across the Americas act as collective agents of challenge and change to
advance health justice. Across Latin America, the most unequal region of the world, and the United States, where inequality
is rising, various health movements are pressuring state institutions to more adequately serve their health needs; and
resisting social arrangements and cultural practices that inhibit a healthful existence. Through this course, students advance
their understanding of these movements and of social change more broadly by interacting with movement actors, by
conducting primary and secondary research, by employing social movement theory, and by producing knowledge. This
course is useful for students interested in health, advocacy work, social research, and Latin America.

END

Critical Race Theory: Social Justice, Advocacy and Intervention

SOC 08488:

Prerequisites: SOC 08221 OR SOC 08230 with minimum grades of C-

Students will explore the social construction of race and the subsequent implications this phenomenon has for particular
members of this society. Building upon the origins of the Critical Legal Studies Movement and Critical Raced Theory
(CRT), students will examine their own dispositions for significant issues from the centrality of race to better understand
the need for becoming social justice advocates while learning a variety of social justice intervention strategies.

END

SOC 08490:

Social Dynamics of Political Violence, Insurgency and Civil Unrest

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 or SOC 08221 or DPEM 00101 or Permission of Instructor

Non-state political violence has become one of the major public policy issues in both US foreign policy and increasingly as
well in domestic policy by examining policy decisions made in response to both terrorist attacks and the threat of terrorism
in homeland security planning, border security, and surveillance. The course emphasizes international non-state violence,
such as terrorism, militancy, insurgency, guerilla warfare, low-intensity conflict and civil war, and how communities, states
and regions respond. By examining numerous international case examples of responses to terrorism through emergency
response organizations, community organizations, and volunteerism, students will have a better understanding of the
significance of social factors that serve as catalyst for the root causes of terrorism and factors that strengthen community
resilience following terrorism and civil unrest.

END

Independent Study in Sociology

SOC 08491:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course gives students an opportunity to pursue individual, specialized research under guidance of a staff member. This
course may not be used as a substitute for any course offered by the department. Entrance is only with the permission of the
instructor and the chairperson of the department. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Seminar On Gender Roles

SOC 08493:

Prerequisites: SOC 08220 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

Students develop and present a major seminar paper in the area of the role of men and/or women in society. The range of
topics covered in any semester depends upon the interests of the enrolled students. Students will read all class papers prior
to presentation.

END

Field Experience Seminar in Sociology - WI

SOC 08494:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C- AND COMP 01112

This seminar provides the opportunity for students to be engaged in a field experience which will contribute to their
sociological development. Students interact with their instructor and the other students in the seminar in the development,
supervision and completion of individual projects. Areas of interest may include sociological research, analysis of social
agencies and the development of affirmative social action programs.
Writing Intensive - WI

END

Sociology of Crime and Criminal Law

SOC 09323:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course analyzes crime and criminal law, emphasizing the nature and extent of crime within the context of the nature
and functions of criminal law. It stresses problems of sociological theory and research in the area.

END

Sociology of Punishment and Correction

SOC 09333:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course examines historical and contemporary theories of punishment within a sociological framework. It gives a
critical survey of the structure, goals and problems of the American criminal justice system.

END

Sociology of Population

SOC 15322:

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course analyzes population growth and change, especially the American population. It emphasizes urban, rural,
ethnic, racial, religious and social class differences. It also examines population variables and population theories. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

Voice for the Stage

THD 07103:

Prerequisites: THD 07105

This course introduces use of the vocal instrument for development of projection and stage vocal ability. Students examine
the physical anatomy of breathing, resonation and articulation. The methodologies of Fitzmaurice, Linklater, Alexander,
Berry, Rodenberg and other master voice teachers are used to guide students in finding the best approach to develop
individual vocal effectiveness when applying their breath, voice and entire physical beings to text for staged performance.

END

Acting Studio

THD 07104:

Acting studio is a practical, experiential class focused on the rehearsal process with a director. The class occurs in parallel
with Directing I, THD 07430. Students will work with each of the directing students, performing in 1-2 scenes per week,
off-book, fully staged, and rehearsed with critique to follow.

END

Introduction to Performance

THD 07105:

This is designed as a first course in performance for majors in the Department of Theatre & Dance. It will stress basic
techniques and fundamentals of movement and interpretation. Class exercises will help students to explore the dynamics of
stage performance. This course lays the groundwork for advanced study. Open to Theatre Majors only.

END

Introduction to Design for Performance

THD 07107:

Introduction to Design for Performance is a required core course for all BA Theatre students that details the collaborative
process of design for performance and explains how all aspects; lighting, set, costume, sound and performers in a live
production come together. Students will develop a basic understanding of the vital role collaboration plays in the production
of live theater.

END

Foundations of Acting

THD 07108:

Prerequisites: THD 07105 and audition into theActing concentration only

This class is a survey course of approaches, theories and techniques for practicing the art of acting. Each module introduces
the student to a specific training methodology, philosophy, pedagogy and/or acting technique. Through reading, discussion,
critical analysis and practical training, students gain facility with examining the art of acting through several lenses,
deploying different tools as they begin the journey of learning and practicing their craft.

END

Colloquium in Theatre I

THD 07111:

These courses will provide a core experience for all majors. Through an on-going series of lectures, discussions,
demonstrations and seminars, students will explore various aspects of Theatre Art and evaluate career options available to
the theatre graduate.

END

Colloquium in Theatre II

THD 07112:

These courses will provide a core experience for all majors. Through an on-going series of lectures, discussions,
demonstrations and seminars, students will explore various aspects of Theatre Art and evaluate career options available to
the theatre graduate.

END

Colloquium in Theatre III

THD 07113:

These courses will provide a core experience for all majors. Through an on-going series of lectures, discussions,
demonstrations and seminars, students will explore various aspects of Theatre Art and evaluate career options available to
the theatre graduate.

END

Colloquium in Theatre IV

THD 07114:

These courses will provide a core experience for all majors. Through an on-going series of lectures, discussions,
demonstrations and seminars, students will explore various aspects of Theatre Art and evaluate career options available to
the theatre graduate.

END

Colloquium in Theatre V

THD 07115:

These courses will provide a core experience for all majors. Through an on-going series of lectures, discussions,
demonstrations and seminars, students will explore various aspects of Theatre Art and evaluate career options available to
the theatre graduate.

END

Colloquium in Theatre VI

THD 07116:

These courses will provide a core experience for all majors. Through an on-going series of lectures, discussions,
demonstrations and seminars, students will explore various aspects of Theatre Art and evaluate career options available to
the theatre graduate.

END

The Living Theatre

THD 07130:

This course helps students develop critical appreciation of the various dramatic media (stage, films, television, radio). By
introducing them to aims and techniques as well as significant products, the course gives students insight into theatrical art,
thereby enriching their enjoyment and sharpening aesthetic judgment.

END

Oral Interpretation of Literature

THD 07135:

This course studies the basic principles of vocal control applied to oral communication of various forms of literature. It
emphasizes such vocal techniques as stress, pause, rate, etc. and these are coordinated with body and facial expression to
achieve clarity of meaning and mood.

END

Exploring Social Issues Through Theatre

THD 07195:

The student will study theatrical styles as a response to the problems of society. Issues like sexism, racism, aging,
intercultural conflicts and the AIDS crisis will be explored as they appear in theatrical forms such as the problem play,
comedy and the epic theatre.

END

Introduction to Theatre and Dance

THD 07201:

Students study current and historical examples of Theatre and Dance with emphasis on the distinguishing characteristics
of each form of performance and on the principles of temporal composition common to all linear or abstract performing art.
The course stresses the fundamentals of interpretation and analysis essential to advanced work in performance, design and
criticism.

END

Script Analysis

THD 07202:

Prerequisites: THD 07.201

This course offers students a working knowledge of the structural elements of dramatic writing and explores dramatic texts
as scripts for performance. Students will learn to analyze dramatic structure, character arc and motivation, atmosphere and
sensory layers, and the tone, style and dialogue of selected drama. They will view these texts such as scripts for the stage
from the perspective of actor, director, and designer. As a way to gain a more profound understanding of the mechanics of
dramatics texts, they will also write their own short plays, in which they directly and deliberately apply the aforementioned
elements of dramatic writing.

END

Costuming I

THD 07203:

This course will present techniques by which stage costumes are constructed. Students will also be given an outline of the
development of fitted clothing. A series of costuming projects will give students a basic understanding of costume design for
the theatre.

END

Costuming II

THD 07205:

Prerequisites: THD 07203

This is a continuation of the study begun in Costuming I. THD 07215: Experiencing Acting 3 s.h. This course is for
non-major students interested in exploring their talents. Through the use of improvisation, theatre games and scene
projects, students examine how actors strengthen and use imagination, awareness and creativity, and how they analyze,
prepare and perform a role.

END

Speech and Dialects

THD 07206:

Prerequisites: THD 07103

This course is an intense technical study of General American (GA) speech and stage dialects. The International Phonetic
Alphabet (IPA) is the primary tool used to develop an understanding of GA speech versus individual regionalisms, and
staged dialects. An emphasis is placed on improving students' ability to speak in such a way as to assist them in attaining
personal and professional goals as an actor or stage performer.

END

Introduction to CAD for Entertainment Design

THD 07210:

Prerequisites: THD 07230

Introduction to CAD for Entertainment Design will provide basic training in use of Vectorworks as it pertains to 2d
Drafting, 3d modeling and rendering. Projects will include creating a professional grade drafting package using the United
States Institute of Theatre Technology's drafting standards and modeling a virtual set design for the Tohill Stage.

END

Experiencing Acting

THD 07215:

This course is for non-major students interested in exploring their talents. Through the use of improvisation theatre games
and scene projects, students examine how actors strengthen and use imagination, awareness and creativity, and how they
analyze, prepare and perform a role.

END

Experiencing Acting II

THD 07216:

Prerequisites: THD 07215

This course is for non-major students who have taken Experiencing Acting, or a foundational equivalent, and would like to
continue more advanced scene and monologue study in order to further hone acting and performance skills.

END

THD 07230:

In this class students will learn the overall principles of modern stagecraft. This course will be broken down into stage
carpentry, stage lighting and costume building techniques.

Stagecraft Fundamentals

END

THD 07231:

Stagecraft II

Stagecraft II is a continuation of the study begun in Stagecraft Fundamentals.

END

Stagecraft III

THD 07232:

Prerequisites: THD 07230 and THD 07231

These courses concentrate on developing advanced skills in the various aspects of stagecraft including carpentry, property
construction and the development of electrics, sound and elevational drawings. Students fulfill assigned responsibilities for
actual theatrical productions.

END

THD 07233:

Prerequisites: THD 07230 and THD 07231

This course is a continuation of the study begun in Stagecraft III.

Stagecraft IV

END

Stagecraft V - Intermediate Concepts

THD 07234:

Prerequisites: THD 07233

The course is based on developing an intermediate working knowledge in the
following areas: production organization, shop tools, building processes, electric and sound systems. Students are expected
to participate in a leadership role on a Department production.

END

Acting I (Majors Only)

THD 07235:

Prerequisites: THD 07103

This course covers elementary actor-training, designed to aid the student actor in identifying both strengths and
weaknesses. Actor training exercises are designed to awaken the student actor's sensibilities to creative expression (such as
improvisations, theatre games, sensitivity exercises, characterization exercises and performance projects). Open to Theatre
majors only; others by permission.

END

Acting II

THD 07236:

Prerequisites: THD 07235 AND THD 08126

An intermediate level acting course, Acting II deepens and extends the basic skills acquired in Acting I. Focusing mainly
on improvisation and its application to character creation and role development, the course stresses the relationship
between the creativity and spontaneity inherent in improvisation and the discipline and design necessary for the creation of
a role from printed scripts.

END

Practicum - Production Ensemble

THD 07241:

Under the supervision of Theatre/Dance technical and design faculty students participate in department productions in
technical and design capacities. The learning experience and work of the learning community is credited through this
course. May be repeated for credit up to an accumulation of 3 s.h. This course is graded as Pass/No Credit.

END

THD 07245:

This course studies the techniques and styles of makeup for the theatre, through demonstration and laboratory work.
Students are required to purchase an inexpensive student makeup kit.

Stage Makeup

END

Costume Construction

THD 07247:

Prerequisites: THD 07230

Students will be introduced to hand and machine sewing techniques utilized in constructing costumes for theater, dance,
cosplay and other performance mediums. Hands-on project based work will introduce learners to a range of fabrications,
basic patternmaking, and special topics as needed.

END

Introduction to Theatre Education

THD 07250:

In this course students study and explore techniques for working with high school and middle school students and are
offered tools for directing plays/performances with young people. It considers such topics as theatre as pedagogy, preparing
theatre lessons, acting techniques, directing/coaching approaches, and age appropriate scene study. The course is designed
to inform undergraduate students considering a career in teacher theatre.

END

Stage Management

THD 07255:

Prerequisites: THD 07230

This course will be a thorough analysis of the technical and organizational aspects as well as the typical responsibilities of
stage management. The focus of the course is the stage manager’s and/or assistant stage manager’s process. Topics include,
but are not limited to: preparing for and running rehearsals, communication and paperwork skills, and leadership and team
building methods. Production participation is required, nights and weekends of production work required.

END

Theatre Study Off-Campus

THD 07270:

This course studies drama at important theatrical centers in the United States or abroad, supervised by faculty. It includes
attendance at productions, discussions with practitioners, tours and specialized workshops, investigation of historical and
cultural sites. Costs vary according to the center being studied and are borne by the student. May be repeated under a
different subtitle.

END

Children's Theatre Workshop

THD 07275:

This course concentrates on the presentation of a children's show to be mounted and acted by Rowan students for South
Jersey elementary school children. The college students will be involved in all phases of the production, including a
"mini-tour" of the show following the production at Rowan University. This course may be repeated with consent of
instructor. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Drawing and Rendering for the Theatre

THD 07300:

Prerequisites: THD 07232

This course introduces students to methods of presenting theatrical design ideas in two-dimensional formats. Students will
learn such skills as perspective drawing, rendering in watercolor, gouache pencil or marker and/or using computer-aided
drawing and painting. In addition, students will complete a portfolio to illustrate the skills learned.

END

African, African-American Theatre: Intercultural Definitions

THD 07301:

Explores the commonality, or difference of styles and visions, in African and African American Theatre, with works by
contemporary African and African American playwrights, such as August Wilson, Wole Soyinka, Imamu Amiri Baraka,
Susan Lori Parks, Efua Sutherland and Femi Osofisan. It will also examine the influences of play directors, actors and
musicians (Hip-Hop, Jazz, Blues, etc.) who contribute to that aesthetic continuum. The practices, issues and achievements
of these playwrights and their unique forms of theater shall be used to project a future for African American theatre in
twenty-first century America. These works shall be used as signposts of stylistic and critical commentary. This is a lecture
cum performance course in which students will be writing, making and performing their own Theatres of the future as final
projects.

END

Drafting, CAD and Model Making for the Theatre

THD 07305:

Prerequisites: THD 07232

The course provides students with advanced opportunities to practice drafting skills in the preparation of designer's
elevations and detail drawings in the production of working drawings for the scenic and electric shops. Students will use
traditional drafting methods and tools as well as CAD techniques and machinery. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Foundations of Theatrical Design

THD 07310:

Prerequisites: THD 07232

In this course, students study the elements that lay the foundation for a successful design career in the theatre. Beginning
with an examination of the place of design in the theatre process, students then study the principles of visual composition
and elements of design, and study play scripts in order to formulate an appropriate design. Students will also be introduced
to the study of historical periods and styles of decor and get exposure to basic sketching and drafting of theatrical designs.

END

Reader's Theatre Workshop

THD 07315:

Prerequisites: THD 07135

In this course, students study the creative and adaptive processes involved in preparing and presenting literature on stage
in a reader's theatre situation. Performances of the manuscripts compiled in the course also help develop the students' own
interpretive skills beyond those which they acquired in the introductory course (Oral Interpretation of Literature). This
course may not be offered annually.

END

Painting Scenery for the Theatre

THD 07325:

Prerequisites: THD 07232

Successful painting for the theatre involves techniques that allow for efficient execution of visual effects that read not from
up close, but from a distance. In this course, the emphasis is on obtaining such 'tricks of the trade' and presenting that
acquired knowledge through the completion of related projects.

END

Advanced Acting

THD 07335:

Prerequisites: THD 07236

This course makes an intensified study of characterization, while continuing developmental work in bodily and vocal
control. It covers approaches to role study as well as the techniques of period acting styles. It combines theory and practice,
including class and public performance. This course may not be offered annually.

END

THD 07336:

Prerequisites: THD 07234

This course is a continuation of the study begun in Stagecraft V.

Stagecraft VI - Intermediate Concepts

END

Touring the Theatre Production

THD 07338:

Students study procedures in touring theatre or dance productions off campus. Students learn sets, properties, costume
design and construction, lighting and sound, staging and performance consistency and ways of adapting to a variety of
facilities and audiences. Students study promotion, organization and administration of tours. Open to students selected for
the cast and crew of the production. May be repeated. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Theatre History I

THD 07339:

This course studies the important works and writers for the stage, together with the development of theatrical modes of
presentation and their influences upon the drama of each period, from the beginnings of theatre in ancient Greece to 1700.
Relationships are drawn between the developing theatre and the political and social history of the times.

END

Theatre History II

THD 07340:

This course is a continuation of THD07.339, bringing the study of theatre and drama from 1700 to the beginning of the
modern period with Ibsen, Chekhov, Strindberg and Shaw, then following with German Expressionism, the emergence of
American Theatre in the 1920's, the despair of the Great Depression, and the World War II era. 

END

Rehearsal and Performance

THD 07345:

This course prepares students for a role for public performance. Once cast, students will study production preparation
from initial concept through the rehearsal process into performance, including the improvement of vocal and physical
technique and its application to characterization.

END

Scene Design Studio

THD 07350:

Prerequisites: THD 07231

This course studies the relationship of the space/time arts to the nature and function of scenic design. Theory is combined
and tested through practical renderings of various plans of the designer. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Stage Lighting Design and Practice

THD 07353:

Prerequisites: THD 07231

In this course, students become familiar with the essential elements of color theory, the physics of light, basic electricity,
the characteristics of specific stage lighting instruments and dimming control equipment and procedure for designing
lighting for a production. Practical experience is included through various types of design problems and work on college
theatrical presentations. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Costume Design

THD 07356:

This course emphasizes the design of costume for the theatre. Costume and its relation to the character and the play are
examined. Through a series of costumes projects, students explore the elements of design, figure drawing and costume
history. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Fundamentals of Entertainment Technology I

THD 07359:

Prerequisites: THD 07230 and THD 07310

In this course, students become familiar with essential elements of modern entertainment technology as it pertains to
lighting and sound. The course covers the basics of electrical theory and safety, the history and characteristics of state
lighting units, dimming and control; stage lighting paperwork, lighting color theory, console operation, intelligent lighting,
and introduction to event lighting, the physics of sound, the history and mechanics of sound equipment, and its practical use
in theater. Industry standard software programs such as Light Wright, Qlab and Vectoworks are used throughout the
course. The student will be trained in reading and interpreting state lighting plots, lighting paperwork, hanging focusing
lights; console operation; programming intelligent lights; operating DMX effects units and setting up sound systems
(playback and live reinforcement). Practical application of the course material is required through work on the
Department’s Mainstage production.

END

Musical Theatre

THD 07360:

This course studies the history of musical theatre, the contributions of artists who have contributed to the mature theatre
and concludes with an analysis of musical theatre elements. It covers the origins of musical theatre, contributions of major
practitioners of the form, current status of musical theatre and critical evaluation.

END

Singing for the Actor

THD 07363:

Prerequisites: MUS 04118 or MUS 97100

This course is designed to introduce the student actor to the techniques of singing for musical theatre. Students will learn
and apply vocal exercises and warm-ups, proper breathing, and vocal support. Students will analyze song structure, read
music, and perform the song in a musical theatre context.

END

Acting for the Musical Theatre

THD 07364:

Prerequisites: THD 07363 Singing for the Actor OR Instructor's approval.

The course is designed as a practical studio course that focuses on duet and trio scenes from the Musical Theatre archive.
Students focus on song performance as well as the spoken test work common in Musical Theatre storytelling. Students will
work tandem with scene partners and continue to work with a piano accompanist.

END

Theatre Management

THD 07365:

This course is an introduction to the economic and administrative function of commercial, repertory, educational and
community theatre in the United States. Students study the role of the producer/manager in policy-making, budgeting and
operations, focusing on legal regulations, personnel, facilities, financing, scheduling, public relations and promotion.
Non-theatre majors should have THD07.130 or permission of the instructor. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Entrepreneurship for the Artist

THD 07366:

Entrepreneurship for the Artist is designed to augment a student's skill set with the current best practices involving the
implementation of a self-started business venture; especially as it pertains to self-producing in the arts. Emphasizing
mindset, communication, organization, self-marketing and project management, this course covers the cycle of generating
an idea and turning it into a viable, successful production. As a practical application of these skills, each student will be
required to create and pitch an artistic endeavor.

END

Devising

THD 07369:

Prerequisites: THD 07363 and THD 07235 and THD 08140 and THD 08141 and THD 07310

Devising considers alternatives to literature based and western structured modes of creative performance practices and the
need for self-generated artistic practices that have become imperative to contemporary art-making. Solo work, Duet, Trio
and group based performance practices will be addressed as well as full ensemble based work that ties into Outreach Theatre
will also be addressed. This course will be offered annually.

END

THD 07370:

This course allows students to pursue an independent project, as determined by student and adviser.

Independent Study

END

Theatre Workshop

THD 07375:

This workshop studies the theoretical and practical aspect of theatre arts through supervision of problems in performance,
set design, construction, lighting, costuming and makeup, business management and directing. By permission of department
only.

END

THD 07376:

Prerequisites: THD 07201

This course offers students a choice of specialized study of a particular dramatic style, movement or artist in theatre.

Seminar in Dramatic Styles

END

Technical Production and Organization

THD 07380:

Prerequisites: THD 07232 and THD 07233

This course is an advanced study of Technical Production. It introduces the process, tools and skills needed to organize
and run a production from the upper management level of the Technical Director. Topics covered are structural design,
building procedures, the proper and safe use of building materials, personnel management and organizational skills. The
class will consist of a variety of theoretical and practical projects.

END

Technical Supervision I

THD 07390:

Prerequisites: THD 07230, THD 07231, THD 07232 and THD 07233

Students learn the artistic and administrative responsibilities of technical staff supervisors on a theatre production team.
Positions studied include assistant technical director, stage manager, master carpenter, master electrician, sound engineer
properties master, and wardrobe supervisor, with equal emphasis placed upon understanding a job's responsibilities and the
techniques of supervising subordinate personnel. Students will be required to function successfully in one assigned
supervisory capacity for a mainstage production.

END

THD 07391:

Further training and experience in supervising technical production work. Students will be working on a different
production and in a different capacity than in Technical Supervision I. These two courses may be taken in either order.

Technical Supervision II

END

THD 07405:

This course offers students a choice of specialized study of a particular interest area in theatre or dance.

Seminar In Theatre

END

Internship in Theatre

THD 07410:

A semester's field experience offers the advanced student opportunities to develop theatre skills in supervised on-the-job
situations. Students are placed in an appropriate theatre to obtain practical training. By department permission only.
Students apply to the department the beginning of the semester prior to the internship. Fall/Spring internships are 15 s.h.;

END

Directing I

THD 07430:

Prerequisites: THD 07235 AND THD 07202

This course studies theories and techniques of script analysis and its translation into dramatic action and dramatic sound
on the stage, including such concepts as composition, movement, pacing and the development of basic acting ability.
Practical directing experience will be utilized.

END

Directing II

THD 07431:

Prerequisites: THD 07430

This course is a continuation of Directing I in which the skills studied in that course are deepened and extended. In
addition to studying techniques of script analysis and staging in greater detail, students investigate various production styles
and methodologies. A major portion of time is devoted to a workshop situation in which students stage scenes and submit
them to class critique. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Avant-Garde Performance: History, Theory, and Practice

THD 07432:

Prerequisites: THD 07430

This class traces the avant-garde movements in theater and performance art from their inception in the mid-19th century
up to the present day. Using plays, performances, theory and history, students will learn the essence of each movement of
avant-garde history, and then create and present their own works inspired by these. The ultimate goal is to provide students
with the context and critical tools to envision their own avant-garde forms in the future.

END

Creative Dramatics

THD 07435:

This course covers the philosophy underlying speech and dramatic activities for children. Methods and materials for
creative drama, story telling, role playing, word games, listening and pantomime are studied and analyzed. Students
participate in demonstrations in the classroom.

END

Stagecraft VII - Advanced Concepts

THD 07436:

Prerequisites: THD 07336

Stagecraft VII continues the work in the Stagecraft Sequence, with an emphasis on the professional execution of a
technical production assignment from concept through realization.

END

Stagecraft VIII - Advanced Concepts

THD 07437:

Prerequisites: THD 07436

Stagecraft VIII continues the work in the Stagecraft Sequence, with an emphasis on the professional execution of a
technical production assignment from concept through realization.

END

Contemporary World Theatre - WI

THD 07440:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or ENGR 01201

Designed to examine significant developments in world theatre and drama since 1956, this course focuses on writers, actors
and groups who have influenced theatre in the last half century. Starting with the angry young men and women of England in
the 1950s, the course moves through the work of the absurdists, the Civil Rights Movement, Vietnam and the Age of
Protest (the Rock revolution). It delves into environmental theatre, the Women's Movement, gay and lesbian theatre, the
Aids epidemic, and considers postmodern theatre practice throughout the world.

END

Theatre of the Holocaust

THD 07442:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 OR ENGR 01201

This class provides students with the historic and dramatic background needed to comprehend and explore difficult issues
surrounding the World War II Holocaust through the lens of dramatic literature. Students will gain an understanding of
how playwrights and other artists use performance and theatre to explore a catastrophic "unthinkable" historic event.

END

Advanced Theatre Education Advanced Theatre Education

THD 07453:

Prerequisites: THD 07250

This course builds on skills learned in Introduction to Theatre Education and enables students to delve deeper into
techniques needed to for K-12 theatre pedagogy, theatre lessons, acting techniques, directing/coaching approaches, and age
appropriate scene study. The course is designed to prepare undergraduate students considering a career in teacher theatre.

END

Professional Preparation for Actors

THD 07455:

Prerequisites: THD 07235

This course prepares actors for auditions and offers practical steps for entering the professional world of theatre (film/tv)
and/or prep for graduate school auditions. Student actors also work with invited professionals for career advice and gain
up-to-­date information regarding professional theatre unions.

END

Senior Project in Theatre Arts

THD 07460:

Prerequisites: for senior-level majors only.

Designed as a capstone experience for Theatre Arts. Selecting a project within a theatre specialty (Performance,
Design/Technical, History/Criticism), and working with a faculty adviser, the student will conceive, research and execute a
specially devised work for public showing or local publication.

END

Movement for the Actor

THD 08126:

Prerequisites: THD 07105

Students study the fundamentals of movement as applied to stage movements, communication and characterization. The
course covers physical discipline, relaxation, shaping, movement, exploring space, movement in ensemble, emotion and the
body, gesture and communication, and physical characterization. Individual and group exercises assist students in
developing a physical technique for the actor in action.

END

THD 08135:

This course provides training at the elementary level of technique in ballet, jazz and modern dance. It explores movement
in time, space and energy relationships, emphasizing individual and group creative experiences through improvisations.

Elements of Dance

END

THD 08140:

The course explores the creation of spontaneous movement experiences with the purpose of increasing body awareness,
movement invention and movement creativity. This course is offered in the Fall semester.

Dance Improvisation I

END

Dance Improvisation II

THD 08141:

Prerequisites: THD 08140

The course continues and further develops skills in the creation of spontaneous movement experiences with the purpose of
increasing body awareness, movement invention and movement creativity. This course is offered in the Spring semester.

END

THD 08142:

This course provides experiences in improvisational duet dancing involving weight sharing, touch, lifting, carrying, and
active use of momentum. Activities develop sensitivity to partnering and spontaneous creativity.

Contact Improvisation

END

World Dance Forms

THD 08146:

This is a movement course that introduces students to a broad spectrum of dances from Asia, Europe, the Middle East,
Africa, and the Americas. Emphasis is placed upon learning and performing dances from various countries throughout the
world. The socio-historical context within which each dance form evolved is also examined. No previous training in dance is
required.

END

Ethnic and Character Dance

THD 08151:

This course studies dance, music, customs and other cultural manifestations of special ethnic regions. It emphasizes the
application of the folk art forms for theatre use. Among the dance forms studied are Scandinavian, Central European,
African, Latin American, and Mediterranean. Each semester focuses on two or more of these dance forms.

END

Ballroom Dance

THD 08190:

This movement course introduces the student to various forms of Ballroom Dance: foxtrot, waltz, swing, jitterbug, disco,
club, samba, merengue, rumba, cha cha, and tango. Emphasis is placed upon basic steps, body placement, style, musicality,
choreography, and the fundamentals of partnering. Observing, critiquing, and researching ballroom dance are also included
within the course.

END

Fundamentals of Tap

THD 08202:

This introductory course covers the fundamentals of tap dance, an indigenous American art form with African, Irish, and
English roots. Emphasis will be placed on technique, musicality, and style. The course introduces center floor exercises,
traveling patterns, and a variety of steps and combinations. Opportunities will be provided to observe and perform tap
dance, as well as research history.

END

Advanced Tap Dance

THD 08203:

Prerequisites: THD 08202

This course continues the study of tap on an advanced level.

END

Dance as Narrative in American 20th Century Film - WI

THD 08210:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course uses an interdisciplinary approach to investigate the role dance has played in informing and acknowledging
social trends in the Twentieth Century. Topics under discussion will build and illuminate connections between dance and
issues of immigration, industry, politics, fashion, social change, class, gender, race, economics, nationalism, and war.

END

Dance for the Musical Theatre

THD 08222:

This course is an intermediate level experience of technical training in stylized jazz dances used in Broadway musical
shows. Students have the opportunity to mount excerpts of dance routines from various eras and to perform them for the
university community.

END

Dance Composition I

THD 08225:

Prerequisites: THD 08377

This course provides a working knowledge and understanding of the fundamental elements involved in the craft of
composing a dance. It emphasizes space, time and dynamics. Short solo and group pieces are presented in an informal
setting. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Fundamentals of Modern Dance

THD 08236:

This course is designed for the student interested in beginning to master the discipline of modern dance technique. The
course draws from the repertoires of recognized modern dance artists who have established a specific movement vocabulary.
Students have an opportunity to analyze various techniques for personal development and the expansion of an articulate
movement vocabulary.

END

Modern Dance I

THD 08237:

Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor/BA in Dance Major Only

This course is designed for experienced students with technical skills in contemporary dance at the intermediate level. It
focuses on the theory and practical application of movement practice including rhythmic structures, spatial awareness and
kinetics with emphasis on aesthetic qualities that lead to performance. This course is offered annually.

END

Fundamentals of Ballet Dance

THD 08246:

Students are introduced to the vocabulary and techniques of ballet movement with emphasis on body alignment and
effective methods for gaining strength and flexibility necessary for proper ballet deportment. It includes barre work, centre
floor and the basic elements of classical ballet vocabulary.

END

Advanced Ballet

THD 08247:

Prerequisites: THD 08246

An advanced level of technique in ballet, this course includes barre (bar) and centre floor and continues to build on the

END

THD 08256:

An introduction to a cross-section of jazz techniques derived from pioneer jazz dancers, this course emphasizes movement
styles and jazz rhythms.

Fundamentals of Jazz Dance

END

Advanced Jazz Dance

THD 08257:

Prerequisites: THD 08256

This course is designed for students interested in mastering movement skill in jazz dance. It emphasizes theoretical and

END

Lecture/Demonstration Production

THD 08270:

Prerequisites: THD 08237

This course offers students an opportunity to experiment with improvisation and a variety of choreographic approaches
using the elements of dance. It provides students with the performing experiences necessary for choreographing and
producing short dance pieces. Resultant productions are performed as lecture/demonstrations throughout public and
private schools of South Jersey. This course may not be offered annually.

END

African Influences in American Dance

THD 08311:

This is a movement and theory course which surveys various dance forms indigenous to African and African-American
cultures. Emphasis is placed upon the evolution and contribution of African-derived dance forms within America. The
richness and complexity of African aesthetics as embodied within dance in America are highlighted. No previous dance
training is required.

END

Creative Dance for Children

THD 08315:

Utilizing functional movement experiences, this course emphasizes creative expression and its relationship to the aesthetic
development of the young child. Students examine and analyze pertinent research materials in addition to the laboratory
experiences. This provides a basis for students to relate creative inventiveness to young children. This course may not be
offered annually.

END

THD 08330:

Dance Notation

Prerequisites: THD 08236 and THD 08246

This course introduces students to a study and practice of reading and recording dance movements by means of symbols. It
offers an opportunity to interpret dance notation scores of simple ballet, folk, and modern dance. This course may not be
offered annually.

END

Choreography

THD 08337:

Prerequisites: THD 08225

This course provides application of the principles of dance composition to choreographic projects by exploring, analyzing
and experimenting with problems in dance performance and production. It emphasizes individual and group improvisation
and the use of different styles. This course acts as a foundation for field experience. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Ballet III

THD 08346:

Prerequisites: THD 08247

An advanced level of ballet techniques for the further development and expansion of the ballet movement vocabulary, this
course includes adagio and allegro. Partnering may be included depending upon male enrollment. This course may not be
offered annually.

END

Introduction to Dance Therapy

THD 08355:

An introductory course for students who are interested in the field of dance therapy, the course demonstrates dance as a
therapeutic and educational growth process that integrates the areas of cognitive, social-emotional and physical
development. Part of the course is presented in a clinical setting, offering students an opportunity to apply what has been
learned. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Modern Dance II

THD 08377:

Prerequisites: THD 08237

This course continues the development of technical skills in contemporary dance at the intermediate/advanced level. It
focuses on the theory and practical application of movement practice including complex movement sequences, rhythmic
structures, spatial awareness and kinetics with emphasis on aesthetic qualities that lead to performance. This course is
offered annually.

END

Modern Dance III

THD 08378:

Prerequisites: THD 08377

This course is designed or students interested in mastering the discipline of modern dance technique. This course
emphasizes alignment, somatic release and the application of movement concepts as applied to advanced level dance
technique. This course is offered annually.

END

Fundamentals of the Lester Horton Technique

THD 08400:

Prerequisites: THD 08236

This codified modern dance technique course is an elective that is strongly recommended for our dance majors. This serves
as an introduction to the basic core principles of the Lester Horton modern dance technique. Students will be required to
immerse themselves in the verbal and physical language of the Horton technique as documented in Ana Marie Forsythe’s
book “The Dance Technique of Lester Horton.”

END

Advanced Styles in Modern Dance

THD 08410:

Prerequisites: THD 08378

This course is designed as the most advanced technique class offered in dance program. Students will experience
advanced/professional level technique class relative to a particular style of modern dance taught by recognized professional
from the field. This course will be offered annually.

END

Intermediate/Advanced Horton Technique

THD 08411:

Prerequisites: THD 08400 or Permission of the Instructor

This codified modern dance technique course is an elective that is strongly recommended for all dance majors. As an
advanced level modern dance course, this class is repeatable and designed to implement the knowledge attained in Intro to
Horton while delving deeper into the study of the core principles of the Lester Horton modern dance technique.

END

Dance History - WI

THD 08436:

This course studies the vital role dance has in cultural development from prehistoric times to the contemporary period and
the relation of dance to music and other art forms throughout history. It stresses individuals and events whose influences
shaped the development of dance. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Dance Theatre Workshop

THD 08437:

Prerequisites: THD 08337 Choreography or THD 07430 Directing.

This course provides in-depth compositional theory, methods, and conceptual approaches to movement-driven theatre
through collaborative project-based artistic problem solving. Dance Theatre Workshop emphasizes movement-based
inquiry form, content, technique, and projection of the theatrical image. This course will be offered annually.

END

Advanced Dance Improvisation

THD 08442:

Prerequisites: THD 08140 and THD 08141

The course explores the creation, design, and performance of spontaneous movement composition. Course activities focus
particular attention on the interplay between improvisational moving and writing, and composing and performing.

END

Dynamics of Human Movement

THD 08465:

This course offers students a working knowledge of the body from the standpoint of dynamics, spatial orientation,
kinesthetic awareness, and alignment principles. It focuses on systems of movement description and analysis and introduces
corrective measures to deal with movement habits and patterns that interfere with body performance. This course may not
be offered annually.

END

Special Topics in Foreign Languages and Literatures

AFRI 16440:

Prerequisites: appropriate language proficiency as determined by the professor

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established Foreign Languages and Literatures curriculum. Each
semester the instruction of this course rotates among faculty members who select topics according to their current scholarly
interests. In this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

Elementary Arabic I

ARAB 12101:

This is a comprehensive foundation course for beginning students of Modern Standard Arabic. It offers an essential
grounding for developing successful communication strategies by practicing listening comprehension and speaking skills
with the sounds and characteristics of Arabic. It will also provide students with opportunities to read and write simple
Arabic prose to meet their communication needs. It introduces students to the culture and history of the Arabic speaking
world.

END

Elementary Arabic II

ARAB 12102:

Prerequisites: ARAB 12101 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course provides an expanded overview of the syntax, structures and vocabulary of Modern Standard Arabic, including
extended practice in the four skill areas of listening comprehension, speaking, reading and writing. It introduces students to
the culture and history of the Arabic- speaking world.

END

Intermediate Arabic I

ARAB 12201:

Prerequisites: ARAB 12102 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course continues to provide an expanded overview of the syntax, structures, and vocabulary of modern Arabic to
students who have completed the Elementary Arabic course sequence and acquired the basic knowledge of Arabic language.
It also provides students with enhanced opportunities to learn and experience the culture and history of the
Arabic-speaking world.

END

Intermediate Arabic II

ARAB 12211:

Prerequisites: ARAB 12201 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course continues to provide an expanded overview of the syntax, structures, and vocabulary of modern Arabic to
students who have completed the Intermediate Arabic I and acquired the basic knowledge of Arabic language. It also
provides students with enhanced opportunities to learn and experience the culture and history of the Arabic-speaking
world.

END

Intermediate Arabic III

ARAB 12212:

Prerequisites: ARAB 12211 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course continues to provide and expanded overview of the syntax, structures, and vocabulary of modern Arabic to
students who have completed Intermediate Arabic II. It also provides students with enhanced opportunities to learn and
experience the culture and history of the Arabic-speaking world.

END

Advanced Arabic I

ARAB 12301:

Prerequisites: ARAB 12212 (Minimum Grade of C-)

This course further develops students’ proficiency in Modern Standard Arabic and all language skills are emphasized
(reading, writing, speaking and listening). Students expand their vocabulary, sharpen their grammar skills, and gain cultural
competence as they learn about the Arabic language and the Arab world through the study of authentic articles selected
from news sources and scholarly journals and magazines, including such topics as politics, religion, and arts/media.

END

Advanced Arabic II

ARAB 12302:

Prerequisites: ARAB 12301 (Minimum Grade of C-)

This course builds on the skills learned in Advanced Arabic I and continues to develop students’ proficiency in Modern
Standard Arabic. All language skills are emphasized (reading, writing, speaking and listening). Students expand their
vocabulary, sharpen their grammar skills, and gain cultural competence as they learn about the Arabic language and the Arab
world through the study of authentic articles selected from news sources and scholarly journals and magazines, including
such topics as politics, religion, and arts/media. This course prepares students to transition to a professional position in the
Middle East or another Arabic-speaking environment.

END

Arabic Civilization and Culture

ARAB 12320:

Prerequisites: ARAB 12212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course, which follows Intermediate Arabic III (ARAB 12.212), will further refine students' linguistic competencies in
Arabic. Students study and discuss cultural topics in Arabic to develop their language competence and gain a more profound
insight into varied aspects of contemporary Arabic as well as Arab civilization and culture.

END

Special Topics in World Languages

ARAB 12440:

Prerequisites: appropriate language proficiency as determined by the professor

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established World Languages curriculum. Each semester the
instruction of this course rotates among faculty members who select topics according to their current scholarly interests. In
this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

Elementary American Sign Language I

ASL 01101:

American Sign Language (ASL) is a visual-gestural language that possesses all of the properties of a natural language. It is
rule-governed and has a rich history. This introductory level course is designed to provide students a way to communicate
and function comfortably in a variety of situations in the Deaf community. Through visual-gestural activities, guided
practice, presentations, and practical assignments, we will explore the language, education, and culture of the American
Deaf Community.

END

Elementary American Sign Language II

ASL 01102:

Prerequisites: ASL 01101 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

American Sign Language (ASL) is a visual-gestural language that possesses all of the properties of a natural language. It is
rule-governed and has a rich history. This introductory level course, which builds on skills acquired in ASL 01101, is designed
to provide students a way to communicate and function comfortably in a variety of situations in the Deaf community.
Through visual-gestural activities, guided practice, presentations, and practical assignments, we will explore the language,
education, and culture of the American Deaf Community.

END

Intermediate American Sign Language I

ASL 01201:

Prerequisites: ASL 01102 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

The third in a sequence of courses in American Sign Language (ASL), this course focuses on further development of
conversational skills in ASL. The course includes extensive work on receptive and expressive use of ASL. It emphasizes the
grammatical structure of ASL, particularly its morphology, syntax, and semantics. Students will acquire and expand different
conversational strategies and increase ASL vocabulary. Appropriate cultural behaviors and conversational regulators in ASL
will continue to be an important part of class. Information of Deaf Culture/history will be expanded. Experience with the
local Deaf community is required

END

Intermediate American Sign Language II

ASL 01211:

Prerequisites: ASL 01201 with (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

The fourth in a sequence of courses in American Sign Language (ASL), this course focuses on further development of
conversational skills in ASL. This course further develops students’ expressive and receptive communication skills. Students
demonstrate competency and an in-depth understanding on non-manual behaviors, topic/comment structure sentence
types, noun/verb pairs, use of space pronominalization, classifiers, and temporal and distributional aspects. Appropriate
culture behaviors and conversational regulators in ASL will continue to be an important part of class. Information on Deaf
Culture/history will be expanded. Experience with the local Deaf community is required.

END

Special Topics in World Languages

ASL 01440:

Prerequisites: ASL 01211 minimum of C-

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established World Languages curriculum by expanding options for
upper-level electives in American Sign Language (ASL). The particular course topic offered may vary, depending on the
scholarly interests of the faculty member as well as student interest and demand.

END

Elementary Chinese I

CHIN 07101:

This is a beginning course in Chinese (Mandarin) for students who have not previously studied the language. It covers the
mechanics of the Chinese language, including intensive practice in listening comprehension and speaking. It will also
introduce students to basic Chinese reading and writing skills.

END

Elementary Chinese II

CHIN 07102:

Prerequisites: CHIN 07101 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This is a beginning course in Chinese (Mandarin) for students who have taken Elementary Chinese I. It covers the
mechanics of the Chinese language including intensive practice in listening comprehension and speaking. It will also offer
exercises for students to develop skills in reading and writing the language.

END

Intermediate Chinese I

CHIN 07201:

Prerequisites: CHIN 07102 or (minimum grade of C-) waiver

This intermediate level Chinese language course provides students the opportunity to develop further their listening
comprehension and competence in spoken Chinese, their ability to engage in more substantial conversations in a variety of
learning, work, and social settings. It will also help students build and utilize their knowledge of the Chinese way of life
culture in conjunction with learning the notions and functions of the language. The course also focuses on students' ability
to read and write simple Chinese prose for their communication needs.

END

Intermediate Chinese II

CHIN 07211:

Prerequisites: CHIN 07201 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

Intermediate Chinese II continues to provide students the opportunity to develop further their competence in listening
comprehension and in spoken Chinese, their ability to engage in more substantial conversations in additional learning, work
and social settings. It will advance and enrich their knowledge of Chinese culture enabling them to understand how to
function in a culturally appropriate manner and to develop and appreciate more subtlety in language use. The course
continues to help students improve their ability to read and write simple Chinese prose for their communication needs.

END

Intermediate Chinese III

CHIN 07212:

Prerequisites: CHIN 07211

In Intermediate Chinese III, students will continue their development of communicative competence in all four language
skill areas (listening, speaking, reading, and writing). Additionally, this course will allow students to increase their
understanding of Chinese culture.

END

CHIN 07400:

Independent Study

END

Special Topics in World Languages

CHIN 07440:

Prerequisites: appropriate language proficiency as determined by the professor

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established World Languages curriculum. Each semester the
instruction of this course rotates among faculty members who select topics according to their current scholarly interests. In
this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

Masterpieces of French Literature in English Translation

FREN 02100:

This course introduces students to the reading of French literary works in English translation. Students acquire a
vocabulary of basic critical terms necessary for the discussion and analysis of narrative works, poetry and theatrical texts.
Through close reading of several texts per genre, students develop critical thinking skills and improve expository speaking
and writing skills. This course may be offered abroad.

END

FREN 02101:

This is a beginning course in French for students who have not previously studied French. This course covers the
mechanics of the French language including intensive practice in listening comprehension, speaking, reading and writing.

Elementary French I

END

Elementary French II

FREN 02102:

Prerequisites: FREN 02101 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

(Continuation of French I) This course focuses on the students' continued development of communicative competence in
French with emphasis on the four skill areas of speaking, reading, writing and listening comprehension.

END

Intermediate French I

FREN 02201:

Prerequisites: FREN 02102 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course is open to students who have had some limited contact with the French language. It offers expanded practice
in listening comprehension, speaking, reading and writing.

END

FREN 02205:

Oral French

Prerequisites: FREN 02211 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

An intermediate-level conversation course which develops a broad range of active vocabulary as well as verbal patterns
leading to greater facility in manipulating the spoken language.

END

Intermediate French II

FREN 02211:

Prerequisites: FREN 02201 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course is open to students who have had some limited contact with the French language. It offers expanded practice
in listening comprehension, speaking, reading and writing.

END

French Reading and Composition

FREN 02212:

Prerequisites: FREN 02211 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course offers a broad grammar review based on readings, practical use of the language, written compositions and
dictations.

END

French Phonetics

FREN 02300:

Prerequisites: FREN 02211 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course provides a scientific study of French based upon the international phonetic system. It emphasizes diction and
phonetic transcription and the correction of individual problems in pronunciation.

END

Advanced French Conversation

FREN 02311:

Prerequisites: FREN 02212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course provides practice in speaking French at conversational speed. It emphasizes clarity and fluency of expression.
Classes include discussions in French on topics of contemporary interest. The class uses both formal and informal methods
to broaden students' vocabulary and enhance their speaking skills.

END

Introduction to French Literature

FREN 02315:

Prerequisites: FREN 02212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course presents selected representative works of French literature within their social and cultural setting from the
Middle Ages to the 19th century in original French texts. The course enhances listening comprehension, speaking, reading
and writing proficiency through literature.

END

French Civilization and Culture

FREN 02320:

Prerequisites: FREN 02212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course provides students with a more profound insight into the varied aspects of contemporary France, its civilization
and culture.

END

Appreciation of French Literature

FREN 02324:

Prerequisites: FREN 02212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course introduces students to the reading of French literary texts. Students acquire a vocabulary of basic critical terms
necessary for the discussion and analysis of narrative works, poetry and theatrical texts. Through close reading of at least one
text per genre, students develop critical approaches with emphasis on the *Explication de Texte* method.

END

Readings in Contemporary French Literature

FREN 02325:

Prerequisites: FREN 02212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course deals with the main currents shaping contemporary French literature. It selects readings which best bring into
focus the characteristics of the time. It emphasizes reading as communication, with analysis and practice of the techniques
of effective reading in French.

END

The French Novel

FREN 02326:

Prerequisites: FREN 02212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course consists of an analysis of the French novel from the beginning to the present day. Students read and discuss
selected major works.

END

History of the French Language

FREN 02400:

Prerequisites: FREN 02212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course gives students an overview of the historical evolution of French from its Latin roots to present-day varieties
spoken in France and the Francophone cultures. It provides an introduction to the science of linguistics.

END

Advanced French Composition

FREN 02410:

Prerequisites: FREN 02212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course provides a systematic study of the problems of translation and of the practical application of written patterns,
thus encouraging greater command of writing skills. It gives considerable attention to stylistics.

END

Evolution of French Civilization

FREN 02420:

Prerequisites: FREN 02212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course surveys French history, art and social institutions as well as the contributions of France to Western
Civilization.

END

The French Short Story

FREN 02421:

Prerequisites: FREN 02212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course analyzes the French short story in its various aspects. It studies in detail selected works of major authors in the
genre.

END

Individual Study (French)

FREN 02435:

Prerequisites: FREN 02212

Students may contract with an instructor to be examined on assigned readings in various areas of French literature.
Non-minors may do the readings in translation; French minors must do the readings in French. No more than 3 semester
hours may be taken in any one semester.

END

Special Topics in World Languages

FREN 02440:

Prerequisites: appropriate language proficiency as determined by the professor

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established World Languages curriculum. Each semester the
instruction of this course rotates among faculty members who select topics according to their current scholarly interests. In
this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

Masterpieces of German Literature in English Translation

GERM 03100:

This course introduces students to German literature in English translation. Using readings from a range of literary genres,
students acquire knowledge of the basic critical terms necessary for the discussion and analysis of narrative works, poetry
and theatrical texts. Through close reading of such works, students develop an appreciation of the cultural and sociopolitical
forces that inform German-speaking civilization. This course may be offered abroad.

END

GERM 03101:

This beginning course is open to students who have not previously studied German. This course covers mechanics of the
language, including intensive practice in listening comprehension, speaking, reading and writing.

Elementary German I

END

Elementary German II

GERM 03102:

Prerequisites: GERM 03101 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

(Continuation of Elementary German I) This course focuses on the students' continued development of communicative
competence in German with emphasis on the four skill areas of speaking, reading, writing and listening comprehension.

END

Intermediate German I

GERM 03201:

Prerequisites: GERM 03102 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course is open to students who have had some limited contact with the German language. It offers expanded practice
in listening comprehension, speaking, reading and writing.

END

Intermediate German II

GERM 03211:

Prerequisites: GERM 03201 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course is open to students who have had some limited contact with the German language. It offers expanded practice
in listening comprehension, speaking, reading and writing.

END

German Reading and Composition

GERM 03212:

Prerequisites: GERM 03211 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course offers a broad grammar review based on readings, practical use of the language, written compositions and
dictations.

END

GERM 03320:

Prerequisites: GERM 03212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course surveys German history, arts and social institutions as well as Germany's contributions to Western civilization.

German Civilization and Culture

END

Advanced German Conversation

GERM 03411:

Prerequisites: GERM 03212 (minimum grade of C-)

This advanced conversation course uses topics from the contemporary German press. It emphasizes clarity and fluency of
expression and includes discussions in German on topics of contemporary interest which lead to the active expansion of
vocabulary.

END

GERM 03435:

Independent Study German

END

Special Topics in World Languages

GERM 03440:

Prerequisites: appropriate language proficiency as determined by the professor

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established World Languages curriculum. Each semester the
instruction of this course rotates among faculty members who select topics according to their current scholarly interests. In
this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

Masterpieces of Italian Literature in English Translation

ITAL 04100:

This course introduces students to Italian literature in English translation. Using readings from a range of literary genres
and authors, (from Dante to Machiavelli, from Calvino to current bestsellers), students acquire knowledge of the basic
critical terms necessary for the discussion and analysis of narrative works, poetry and theatrical texts. Through close reading
of such works, students develop an appreciation of the cultural and sociopolitical forces that inform Italian civilization. The
course is taught in English and has no prerequisite.

END

Elementary Italian I

ITAL 04101:

This introductory course is open to students who have not previously studied Italian. This course studies Italian language
structures and patterns and offers practice in articulating these patterns. It also gives some attention to other language skills,
such as listening comprehension, speaking, reading and writing.

END

Elementary Italian II

ITAL 04102:

Prerequisites: ITAL 04101 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

(Continuation of Elementary Italian I) This course focuses on the students' continued development of communicative
competence in Italian with emphasis on the four skill areas of speaking, reading, writing and listening comprehension.

END

Italian Topics in English

ITAL 04140:

This course, taught in English, brings new perspectives and themes to the established World Languages curriculum,
pertaining to the Italian language, aspects of Italian culture, and Italian literature in English translation. The particular
course topic offered may vary, depending on the scholarly interests of the faculty member as well as student interest and
demand.

END

Intermediate Italian I

ITAL 04201:

Prerequisites: ITAL 04102 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course is open to students who have had some limited contact with the Italian language. It surveys grammar and
language patterns and offers expanded practice particularly in speaking and reading in the language.

END

Intermediate Italian II

ITAL 04211:

Prerequisites: ITAL 04201 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course is open to students who have had some limited contact with the Italian language. It surveys grammar and
language patterns and offers expanded practice particularly in speaking and reading in the language.

END

Italian Reading and Composition

ITAL 04212:

Prerequisites: ITAL 04211 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

In this course, students will enhance their competencies in Italian language, with particular emphases on reading and
writing skills. Students will be exposed to a wide variety of texts from different genres, (informative, journalistic, literary, and
academic), and will engage in both formal and informal, creative and academic writing.

END

Italian Civilization and Culture

ITAL 04320:

Prerequisites: ITAL 04212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course aims to provide students with a more profound insight into the varied aspects of contemporary Italy, its
civilization and culture. Students will also gain a better understanding of the current dynamics in Italian society and will be
able to identify the main contributions of Italian culture to Western civilization. Moreover, students will further refine their
linguistic competencies, as they study and discuss cultural topics in Italian.

END

Special Topics in World Languages

ITAL 04440:

Prerequisites: appropriate language proficiency as determined by the professor

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established Foreign Languages and Literatures curriculum. Eash
semester the instruction of this course rotates among faculty members who select topics according to their current scholarly
interests. In this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

Elementary Japanese I

JAPA 08101:

This is a comprehensive foundation course for beginning students of modern Japanese. It offers an essential grounding for
developing successful communication strategies by practicing listening comprehension and speaking skills, emphasizing the
sounds and speech patterns of Japanese. It will also provide students with opportunities to read and write simple Japanese
prose to meet their communication needs. It introduces students to the culture and history of the Japanese-speaking world.

END

Elementary Japanese II

JAPA 08102:

Prerequisites: JAPA 08101 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course provides an expanded overview of the syntax, structures and vocabulary of modern Japanese, including
extended practices in the four skill areas of listening comprehension, speaking, reading and writing. It introduces students
to and amplifies their knowledge of the culture and history of Japan.

END

Intermediate Japanese I

JAPA 08201:

Prerequisites: JAPA 08102 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course continues to provide an expanded overview of the syntax, strucdtures, and vocabulary of modern Japanese to
students who have completed the Elementary Japanese course sequence and acquired basic knowlege of the Japanese
language. It also provides students with enhanced opportunities to learn and experience the culture and history of Japan.

END

Intermediate Japanese II

JAPA 08211:

Prerequisites: JAPA 08201 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course is a contiunation of Intermediate Japanese I (JAPA 08.201) and focuses on learning modern Japanese with
equal emphasis on speaking, listening comprehension, reading and writing. It also provides students further opportunities to
learn and experience in depth the culture and history of Japan.

END

Intermediate Japanese III

JAPA 08212:

Prerequisites: JAPA 08211 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course focuses on the students' continued development of communicative competence in Japanese, with practice in
the four skill areas of speaking, reading, writing, and listening comprehension. The course also targets preparation and
practice for the Japanese Language Proficiency Tect (JLPT). In addition, it provides further opportunities for in-depth
studey of the culture and history of Japan.

END

Oral Japanese

JAPA 08305:

Prerequisites: JAPA 08212 Minimum grade of C-

This course focuses on the students' continued development of spoken Japanese skills. The course aims to improve their
communicative competence within a broader range of contexts through exercising grammatical accuracy and facility in the
production of sentences and oral paragraphs.

END

Japanese Civilization and Culture

JAPA 08320:

Prerequisites: JAPA 08212 (Minimum grade of C-)

This course aims to provide students with a profound insight into the varied aspects of Japan, its civilization and culture.
Students will further refine their linguistic competencies as they study and discuss cultural topics in Japanese.

END

Special Topics in World Languages

JAPA 08440:

Prerequisites: JAPA 08212 Minimum of C-

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established World Languages curriculum by expanding options for
upper-level electives in Japanese language. The particular course topic offered may vary, depending on the scholarly interests
of the faculty member as well as student interest and demand.

END

LAT 09101:

This is a beginning course in Latin. It emphasizes Latin grammar and vocabulary. Students will also read representative
Latin prose selections, including the writings of Caesar.

Elementary Latin I

END

Elementary Latin II

LAT 09102:

Prerequisites: LAT 09101 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This is a beginning course in Latin continuing from Elementary Latin I. It emphasizes Latin grammar and vocabulary.
Students will also read representative Latin prose selections, including the writings of Caesar.

END

Special Topics in World Languages

LAT 09440:

Prerequisites: appropriate language proficiency as determined by the professor

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established World Languages curriculum. Each semester the
instruction of this course rotates among faculty members who select topics according to their current scholarly interests. In
this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

Modern Descendants of the Incas: Quechua Language, Culture, and History

QUEC 10100:

Prerequisite: SPAN 05101 or Waiver

This course explores the language, culture, and history of the Quechua people, the modern descendants of the Incas.
Students will gain a basic knowledge and command of the Quechua language, the most widely used Native American
language today, which is still spoken by an estimated eight million people living throughout southern Colombia, Peru,
Ecuador, Bolivia, northern Chile and northern Argentina.

END

RUSS 06101:

This beginning course is open to students who have not previously studied Russian. It covers mechanics of the language,
practice in articulating Russian speech patterns and reading and writing in Russian.

Elementary Russian I

END

Elementary Russian II

RUSS 06102:

Prerequisites: RUSS 06101 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

(Continuation of Elementary Russian I) This course focuses on the emphasis on the students' continued development of
communicative competence in Russian with emphasis on the four skill areas of speaking, reading, writing and listening
comprehension.

END

Intermediate Russian I

RUSS 06201:

Prerequisites: RUSS 06102 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course is open to students who have had some limited contact with the Russian language. It surveys grammar and
offers expanded practice, particularly in speaking and reading.

END

Intermediate Russian II

RUSS 06211:

Prerequisites: RUSS 06201 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course is open to students who have had some limited contact with the Russian language. It surveys grammar and
offers expanded practice, particularly in speaking and reading.

END

RUSS 06345:

This course studies the major works of Russian prose, poetry and drama of the 18th and 19th centuries in the context of
political, cultural and intellectual history.

Russian Literature in Translation I

END

RUSS 06347:

This course presents the image and role of Russian women from the 18th to the 20th centuries as reflected in Russian
literature. The language of instruction is English.

Women in Russian Literature (In Translation)

END

Special Topics in World Languages

RUSS 06440:

Prerequisites: appropriate language proficiency as determined by the professor

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established World Languages curriculum. Each semester the
instruction of this course rotates among faculty members who select topics according to their current scholarly interests. In
this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

Masterpieces of Hispanic Literature in English Translation

SPAN 05100:

This course introduces students to the reading of Hispanic literary works in English translation. Students acquire a
vocabulary of basic critical terms necessary for the discussion and analysis of narrative works, poetry and theatrical texts.
Through close reading of several texts per genre, students develop critical thinking skills and improve expository writing and
speaking skills. This course may be offered abroad.

END

Spanish I

SPAN 05101:

This course introduces the Spanish language and focuses on the students' development of
communicative competence in Spanish with emphasis on the four skill areas of listening, comprehension, speaking, reading
and writing.

END

Spanish II

SPAN 05102:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05101 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

(Continuation of Spanish I) This course focuses on the students' continued development of communicative competence in
Spanish with emphasis on the four skill areas of speaking, reading, writing and listening comprehension.

END

Accelerated Business Spanish I

SPAN 05104:

This course introduces the Spanish language and focuses on the students' development of communicative competence in
Spanish with emphasis on the four skill areas of listening comprehension, speaking, reading and writing. It is also designed
to introduce students to the Spanish-speaking business world through practical activities and business-related vocabulary
and concepts. The course is designed to complement the business student's curriculum in a practical, accelerated method of
delivery.

END

Accelerated Business Spanish II

SPAN 05106:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05104 and/or SPAN 05101

(Continuation of Accelerated Business Spanish I) This course focuses on the students' continued development of
communicative competence in Spanish with emphasis on the four skill areas of listening comprehension, speaking, reading
and writing. It is also designed to continue introducing students to the Spanish-speaking business world through practical
activities and business-related vocabulary and concepts. The course is designed to complement the business student's
curriculum in a practical, accelerated method of delivery.

END

Spanish Topics in English

SPAN 05140:

This course, taught in English, brings new perspectives and themes to the established World Languages curriculum,
pertaining to the Spanish language, aspects of Spanish (Peninsular) and Latin American culture, and Hispanic literature in
English translation. The particular course topic offered may vary, depending on the scholarly interests of the faculty member
as well as student interest and demand.

END

SPAN 05201:

Spanish III

Prerequisites: SPAN 05102 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

(Continuation of Spanish I and II) This course focuses on the students' continued development of communicative
competence in Spanish with emphasis on the four skill areas of speaking, reading, writing and listening comprehension.

END

Accelerated Business Spanish III

SPAN 05203:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05106 and/or SPAN 05102

(Continuation of Accelerated Business Spanish I and II) This course focuses on the students' continued development of
communicative competence in Spanish with emphasis on the four skill areas of listening comprehension, speaking, reading
and writing. It is also designed to increase students' understanding of the Spanish-speaking business world through practical
activities and business-related vocabulary and concepts. The course is designed to complement the business student's
curriculum in a practical, accelerated method of delivery.

END

Spanish Reading and Conversation

SPAN 05211:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05201 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course focuses on the students' continued development of communicative competence in Spanish with practice in the
four skill areas of speaking, reading, writing and listening comprehension, in addition to greater emphasis on reading skills
and oral production.

END

Spanish Reading and Composition

SPAN 05212:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05211 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course focuses on the students' continued development of communicative competence in Spanish with special
emphasis on written communication. Students will produce descriptive, narrative and expository texts.

END

Accelerated Business Spanish Reading & Conversation

SPAN 05221:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05203 and/or SPAN 05201

This course focuses on the students' continued development of communicative competence in Spanish with practice in the
four skill areas of listening comprehension, speaking, reading and writing. It places greater emphasis on reading skills
centered on business-related texts and also on oral production concerning business-related situations. In addition, it is
designed to increase students' understanding of the Spanish-speaking business culture through practical activities and
business-related vocabulary and concepts. It complements the business student's curriculum through a practical, accelerated
method of delivery.

END

Introduction to Anthropological Linguistics

SPAN 05250:

Students in this interdisciplinary course will engage in the scientific study of language with particular reference to the
relationships among the languages, thoughts, and cultures of speech communities living all over the world, including within
the United States, France, India, Canada, Spain, Japan and Peru, among others. Additional course topics include the process
of human language acquisition, structures of human language, bilingualism and the ways in which race, class, gender, and
other social characteristics may be displayed through the use of language.

END

Spanish Phonetics

SPAN 05300:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05211 or SPAN 05212 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course provides a scientific study of Spanish pronunciation based upon the international phonetic system. It
emphasizes exercises in diction and phonetic transcription and the correction of individual problems in pronunciation.

END

Appreciation of Hispanic Literature

SPAN 05301:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course introduces students to the reading of Hispanic literary texts. Students acquire a vocabulary of basic critical
terms necessary for the discussion and analysis of narrative works, poetry, and theatrical texts. Through close reading of at
least one text per genre, students develop critical approaches with emphasis on the "comentario de textos" method.

END

Introduction to Hispanic Linguistics

SPAN 05302:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course will introduce students to the major subfields of Hispanic linguistics, including phonology (sound structure),
morphology (word structure), syntax (sentence structure), semantics (structure of meaning), pragmatics (language use),
language change and sociolinguistics (language use among speakers with different social and geographical backgrounds).

END

Oral Spanish

SPAN 05305:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05211 or SPAN 05212 (minimum grade of C-) or waiver

This course is open to students who wish to improve their spoken Spanish skills. Its design reflects the objectives of
current national trends in encouraging oral Spanish production as outlined and measured by the ACTFL standards. Students
will develop greater grammatical accuracy and control, the ability to describe and narrate, and greater facility in the
production of sentences and oral paragraphs.

END

SPAN 05312:

Spanish for Business A

Prerequisites: SPAN 05212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course is designed to help students interact with Hispanic communities on a business level, by improving their verbal
and written skills, and exposing them to authentic print and visual media from the world of banking, advertising, and
commerce. It stresses the development of functional language skills for real-life purposes within an accurate cultural context
that reflects the variety of the Hispanic world.

END

Spanish for Medical Personnel

SPAN 05313:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course is designed to give students and practicing medical personnel the conversational and cultural tools they need to
interact with Hispanic communities in a clinical setting. It stresses the development of functional language skills while
addressing the special concerns of medical personnel with Spanish-speaking patients and their families in hospitals,
emergency rooms, doctors' offices and clinics.

END

SPAN 05314:

Spanish for Business B

Prerequisites: SPAN 05212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course is designed to help students interact with Hispanic communities on a business level, by improving their verbal
and written skills, and exposing them to authentic print and visual media. Areas of study include the various hispanic
business cultures concerning human resources, labor relations, marketing, finance, goods and services, imports and exports.

END

Spanish for Law

SPAN 05315:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course provides an overview of legal terminology, legal systems in Spain and Latin America, and legal disparities in
Spanish-speaking communities. Students will develop reading, writing, and speaking skills for legal purposes. Students will
also develop intercultural competency skills in legal contexts through participation in service-learning in the community.

END

Spanish for Medical Emergencies and Disaster Response

SPAN 05316:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05211 minimum grade of C-

This course is designed to give students and practicing medical personnel the Spanish language skills they need to address
common emergencies in the home, school, and workplace and their management in the wider community. It stresses the
development of oral and written Spanish language skills applicable to the five phases of the emergency planning cycle:
preparedness, prevention, response, recovery and mitigation.

END

SPAN 05320:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course provides an overview of the religious, political, artistic and social history of Spain.

Spanish Civilization and Culture

END

Spanish American Civilization and Culture

SPAN 05324:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course is an overview of cultural, social, political and economic history of the different major periods that have shaped
Spanish America through tradition, process and crisis.

END

SPAN 05325:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05301 (minimum grade of C-)

This course examines Peninsular works of various genres from contemporary Spanish writers.

Readings in Contemporary Spanish Literature

END

Spanish Novel

SPAN 05326:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05301 (minimum grade of C-)

This course studies the novel in Spain and its most outstanding characteristics, with reading and discussion of some of the
best known writers from the Golden Age to the 19th century.

END

Spanish American Poetry

SPAN 05327:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05301 (minimum grade of C-)

Students are introduced to the various movements and philosophies of Spanish American poetry which begin to take shape
in Spanish American Modernism and continue through the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Students will examine its
genesis and evolution as it adapts and reacts to socio-cultural, geographic and political issues.

END

Spanish-American Theater

SPAN 05328:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05301 (minimum grade of C-)

This course examines Spanish American drama in both its textual and performance aspects, tracing its relationships to
ethics, society, history, culture and contemporary public issues. Representative works from the European tradition as well as
non-traditional, regional and vanguard theater will be examined.

END

Survey Of Spanish American Literature II

SPAN 05329:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05301

This course is a historical overview of Spanish American literature in its cultural, sociological, bibliographical and formal
make-up across many different genres from the consolidation of Spanish American Modernism to Contemporary literature.

END

Introduction to Spanish Translation

SPAN 05340:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05212 (minimum grade of C-)

Beyond acquiring the basic skills necessary for professional Spanish-to-English and English-to-Spanish translation,
students of this course will improve their Spanish and English reading comprehension skills, sharpen their insight into the
linguistic nature of both Spanish and English, gain knowledge regarding the ways in which both languages communicate
cultural values and become acquainted with social and geographical variations of both languages. In addition, students will
acquire experience in translating general material, such as from magazines, newspapers, and letters, and specialized material
from the fields of literature, business, medicine, law, and the social sciences.

END

Introduction to Spanish Interpretation

SPAN 05350:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course provides an introduction to the strategies, theories, and techniques in interpretation with a primary focus on
consecutive interpreting, intercultural competence, and Spanish/English contrasts (e.g., phonology, morphology, syntax,
semantics, etc.). Simulations and service-learning are integrated in the course to develop students’ interpretation skills in
both the classroom and community contexts.

END

Contemporary Spanish Theater

SPAN 05381:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05301 (minimum grade of C-)

This course introduces students to recent trends in Peninsular drama beginning with the initial manifestations of formal
renovation towards the beginning of the twentieth century and continuing through to present-day Spain.

END

Spanish-American Short Story

SPAN 05383:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05301 (minimum grade of C-)

This course analyzes a selection of Spanish American short stories and their relation to culture, aesthetics and modernity,
covering a wide variety of authors, both canonical and vanguard.

END

History of The Spanish Language

SPAN 05400:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05212 (minimum grade of C-)

This course gives students an overview of the historical evolution of Spanish from its Latin roots to present-day varieties
spoken in Spain and Latin America. It provides an introduction to the science of linguistics.

END

Advanced Spanish Grammar and Composition (WI)

SPAN 05409:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and two 300 level courses in Spanish (minimum grade of C-)

This course focuses on the continued improvement of writing Spanish with emphasis on narration and description situated
in time. It provides an advanced grammar review and practice in the process of writing and in the expression of nuances and
idioms in Spanish.

END

Advanced Spanish Grammar and Composition

SPAN 05410:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05301 (minimum grade of C-)

This course helps perfect students' skills in writing Spanish and in the knowledge of its grammatical structures. It provides
exercises in translating modern authors and in composition.

END

Advanced Spanish Conversation

SPAN 05411:

Prerequisites: Any 300-level course in Spanish (minimum grade of C-)

This course is open to students who wish to improve their spoken Spanish skills. Students will develop enhanced
grammatical precision, the ability to produce connected and cohesive discourse and communicative strategies in a variety of
conversational situations.

END

Spanish-American Novel

SPAN 05426:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05301 (minimum grade of C-)

This course deals primarily but not exclusively with contemporary Spanish American novels, analyzing their political,
historical, social and cultural importance. Also examined are critical aspects such as voice, narratology, discourse and gender.

END

Spanish Individual Study

SPAN 05435:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05301 (minimum grade of C-)

This course gives students an opportunity to study independently in order to strengthen their background in a particular
area of Hispanic studies.

END

Special Topics in World Languages

SPAN 05440:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05301 (minimum grade of C-)

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established World Languages curriculum. Each semester the
instruction of the course rotates among faculty members with select topics according to their current scholarly interests. In
this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

Advanced Spanish Translation

SPAN 05441:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05340 (minimum grade of C-)

As a continuation of Introduction to Spanish Translation, this course examines translation theories, strategies, and
Spanish-to-English and English-to-Spanish and practices in classroom and community contexts through service-learning.
Students in this course will further develop their translation, critical thinking, intercultural, linguistic, and analytical skills to
examine Spanish/English contrasts via practical application in diverse fields and contexts. This course encompasses ethical
translation practices in a variety of disciplines including (but not limited to) medical, legal, scientific, literary, and
commercial.

END

Internship in Spanish

SPAN 05452:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05212 with minimum grade of C-and Instructor Approval

The faculty-supervised Internship in Spanish requires 120 hours of internship experience in a professional context.
Students maintain a supervisor-signed log of working hours, write weekly diary entries, and prepare a final reflective paper.
The Internship in Spanish enables students to apply their extensive coursework in Spanish to practice. Students will be
assigned an internship by the faculty member or may obtain instructor approval for internships.

END

SPAN 05481:

The Generation of 1898

Prerequisites: SPAN 05301 (minimum grade of C-)

This course studies the origin, development and influence of the so-called "Generation of `98," its philosophy and
outstanding characteristics. Students read and discuss works of some of the major authors.

END

Contemporary Spanish Novel

SPAN 05482:

Prerequisites: SPAN 05301 (minimum grade of C-)

This course studies the contemporary novel of twentieth and twenty-first century Spain, examining its most outstanding
characteristics. Texts from several important periods, such as Posguerra, Transición and present-day Spain among others
will be studied. Areas of emphasis include voice, narratology, discourse and gender.

END

Study Abroad

SPAN 05499:

The Department encourages students to study abroad. This course is designed to give firsthand knowledge of the social,
cultural and historical life of Spain and Spanish American countries. The University offers a study abroad program. For
further information contact the director of The International Center or the department chairperson.

END

Special Topics in World Languages

SPAN 05540:

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established Foreign Languages and Literatures curriculum. Eash
semester the instruction of this course rotates among faculty memebers who select topics according to their current
scholarly interests. In this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

Improving Personal Writing Skills

COMP 01100:

This developmental writing course helps students eliminate major writing problems with essay organization, support, and
mechanics. The course improves students' writing prior to enrollment in College Composition I. Students' progress is
evaluated on the basis of a portfolio of their semester's work. A writing test determines student placement.

END

Foundations for College Writing

COMP 01103:

This free elective writing course is portfolio-based and introduces students to college-level writing and to composing
practices that emphasize multi-stage writing through multiple modes of composition and reflection. It guides students to
produce focused and coherent writing, and it addresses grammar and mechanics within the context of students’ writing.
Students are placed in this course based on department placement criteria. Upon successful completion of this course,
students move to Intensive College Composition I (COMP 01105).

END

Intensive College Composition I

COMP 01105:

Prerequisites: Appropriate placement score or COMP 01103

This course is the four-credit equivalent of College Composition I (COMP 01111) that allows students additional time to
develop the same writing competency required of College Composition I. This course introduces students to a variety of
writing forms and emphasizes writing as a recursive process of exploring, researching, drafting and revising. Students
produce purposeful, literate, well-developed, and informed writing that requires critical reading, thinking and writing
activities. The course also emphasizes responsible evaluation and use of information. Course requirements include a
portfolio comprised of works created during the semester. Students are placed in the course based on the Writing Arts
Department placement criteria. Passing this course fulfills the College Composition I (COMP 01111) General Education

END

College Composition I

COMP 01111:

Prerequisites: Appropriate placement score

This course introduces students to a variety of writing forms and emphasizes writing as a recursive process of exploring,
researching, drafting and revising. Students produce purposeful, literate, well-developed, and informed writing that requires
critical reading, thinking and writing activities. The course also emphasizes responsible evaluation and use of information.
Course requirements include a portfolio comprised of works created during the semester. Students are placed in the course
based on the Writing Arts placement criteria.

END

College Composition II

COMP 01112:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 or COMP 01105 or HONR 01111

This course builds on the concepts and approaches in College Composition I (COMP 01111) and/or Intensive College
Composition I (COMP 01105). The course emphasizes argumentation and information literacy. It introduces students to
argumentative strategies, asks them to identify and analyze forms of argumentation, and requires them to write a variety of
well-researched and ethically responsible arguments. Students will work to become independent researchers who can find
relevant information from a variety of sources (both academic and non-academic, traditional text and digital) and evaluate
and present that information to an academic audience. Course requirements include a portfolio comprised of works created
during the semester.

END

English as a Second Language I

ESL 08110:

Developed for students whose native language is not English, this course places emphasis on listening and speaking while
developing skills through practice of reading and writing in English. The course includes cultural topics to facilitate
students' adaptation to the American educational environment. This course may not be offered annually.

END

English as a Second Language II

ESL 08111:

This is a mid-level course for students learning English as a second language. It helps students acquire increased skill in
English usage, particularly written English. The course focuses on sentence structure and other grammatical concerns such
as verb formation and pronoun reference. There is also some emphasis on spoken English. Students continue to discuss
cultural topics while improving their ability to read and write in the target language of English.

END

English as a Second Language III

ESL 08112:

This course helps non-native students succeed in college by developing increased competence in the use of English.
Students read and write in English, discussing differences between native languages and English. They also discuss writing
formats generally encountered in college. The course offers further examination of English syntax and stresses building an
English vocabulary.

END

Basics of Academic English for Non-Native Speakers of English

ESL 08115:

This developmental course will introduce English language learners to the academic English skills needed to succeed in
college. Using an integrated skills language approach, students will improve in all language skills as students learn to write
various genres of essays while also offering further examination of English syntax and vocabulary building.

END

Advanced Academic English for Non-Native Speakers of English

ESL 08120:

This course is designed to further develop academic English Skills for English language learners so that they are prepared to
suceed in college. While exploring cross-cultural topics of interest, students will focus on developing a more complex
understanding and use of academic writing. With the emphasis on writing skills, students will hone their library and
information literacy skills needed for college.

END

Core I: Theories and Techniques of Writing

MAWR 01554:

Core I offers an indepth examination of theories of composing, focusing on the interdisciplinary nature of writing through
inquiry into rhetorical elements common to all writers, for example, genre, tone, audience, point of view, and voice. It also
considers basic principles and techniques of writing, including narration, dialogue, exposition and style. Students will
examine many genres of writing and compare and contrast the application of techniques to the differing genres.

END

Writing for Electronic Communities

MAWR 01555:

This course presents the rhetorical, social, and practical dimensions of writing in electronic (cyber) contexts. Students
focus both on the various roles an individual creates and maintains when writing for different cybermedia formats and the
kinds of conventions, concerns and grammars that exist in discrete electronic systems like the World Wide Web, listservs,
distribution lists, the Intranet, e-mail, and hypertext. Seminar presentations and a semester-long project in a concentrated
area of writing for a particular electronic community demonstrate students' ability to communicate on-line.

END

Fiction Workshop

MAWR 01558:

Students will complete, through the composition of a first draft and revision, works of literary fiction with emphasis upon
the short story. In addition, students will read a body of published stories that illustrates such elements of fiction as setting,
point of view, characterization and dialogue. Students will develop an analytical vocabulary that enables them to read,
interpret, and evaluate the work of other fiction writers. A major portion of this class will be given over to workshop sessions
during which students share and evaluate each other's work. As a workshop, this course can be taken twice for credit.

END

Core II: Research Methods for Writers

MAWR 01559:

Prerequisites: MAWR 01554

Core II surveys non-quantitative research methods writers use. This class examines techniques of print and on-line
research, interviewing, and case studies to develop the ability to weigh and assess the reliability and relevance of
information. Students will learn to identify and present problems in writing using different perspectives and learn how these
research styles guide a writer's interpretation of information. The course prepares students to develop their own descriptive
research projects.

END

Managerial Communication

MAWR 01560:

Managerial Communication introduces students to the theoretical and practical insights of corporate communication. The
course helps students develop leadership communication skills and is designed to improve communication skills for
managers, information workers, and other professional writers. Students will learn about rhetorical theories and rhetorical
strategies for responding to communication situations, current forms of corporate communication, effects of technology
and globalization on corporate communication, and guidelines for ethical communication. Students will prepare a variety of
professional quality documents in response to real world, case-based assignments.

END

Information Architecture

MAWR 01564:

Information Architecture explores the connections among web site usability, interactivity, design, and navigation
principles as each relate to the written content. Students investigate how written content influences the look and
user-friendliness of web sites. Specific issues addressed in the course include presenting content for audiences with
disabilities or for non-English speakers; privacy and security concerns; and the rise of information anxiety in the general
public.

END

Technical Writing

MAWR 01565:

Technical Writing introduces students to the rhetorical, ethical, and professional issues associated with technical
communication. It focuses on the rhetorical principles behind standard formats and styles of technical documents. It
explores topics such as, document design; ethics (including issues of product liability); editing, style, and mechanical
correctness; the role of technology; and the impact of the global marketplace.

END

Editing the Literary Journal

MAWR 01566:

This course provides hands-on experience with the editorial and managerial processes involved in publishing Glassworks, a
literary journal in print and electronic formats. Students will study both successful and struggling journals and basic
reference guides to determine criteria for success. Working with the instructor and various section editors, students will
solicit, evaluate, and select submissions, communicate with contributors about editorial decisions, determine the layout and
design of the journal, and distribute the journal. They will also evaluate and produce editorial content in various genres,
including book reviews, author interviews, and opinion editorials, for potential publication in the magazine.

END

Professions in Publishing

MAWR 01567:

In this Master’s level course, students will be introduced to the vast and complicated world of publishing, and will acquire a
basic understanding of the different roles, terms, and current issues within the industry, especially as it pertains to trade
industry publishing. Students will explore the variety of publishing structures in the industry today, emphasizing
developmental editing and the role of the acquisitions editor. Students will also learn about marketing, production, sales,
agenting, contract negotiation, and the process of developmentally editing manuscripts. Through working hands-on with
materials and speaking with industry professionals, students will leave the course empowered to engage in the publishing
industry and what such work will entail.

END

MAWR 01615:

Independent Study

END

Internet and Writing Studies

MAWR 01620:

This is a theory driven seminar course with a practical component wherein students will learn HTML, CSS, and how to
compose web sites according to the latest theories on web design. Students will read scholarly texts that introduce them to
the evolution of written communication and writing technologies, Internet studies, and hypertext theory. Students will use
these texts and theories to both analyze and compose various web sites, including an online portfolio of work they would
like to showcase for future employers or graduate schools.

END

Visual Rhetoric and Multimodal Composition

MAWR 01621:

This is a theory driven seminar course with a pracitcal component. Students will read scholarly texts that introduce them
to theories on multimodality, semiotics, visual rhetoric, copyright, and remix. Students will use these theories to both
analyze and compose visual texts using multiple modes of communication.

END

Publishing for Creative Writers

MAWR 01622:

In this course, students aspiring to become published authors will explore many facets of literary publishing, from
submitting work to agents and editors to editing a manuscript in production and marketing a completed book. Students will
examine the many complex processes by which a literary manuscript (novel, story collection, memoir, etc.) becomes a book.
Students will learn how to submit creative work to literary magazines, to agents, and to publishers. They will submit at least
one completed work (an essay, a story, or a poem) to an appropriate journal or magazine. They will write a query letter and a
synopsis for one of their own book-length projects and develop a marketing plan for the projected work. They will learn the
most common reasons that writing is rejected and how to avoid them. They will learn about the varied roles of agents and
editors from the editorial process through the design, production and promotion of the book. They will learn about the
importance of applying for grants and fellowships, of submitting to literary competitions, and of "networking" in the
development of a writing career. Students with completed or nearly completed books may use their own manuscripts for all
of the above assignments.

END

Poetry Workshop

MAWR 02505:

This class will provide a forum for students to explore the strategies poets use in creative expression. The students will
develop an analytical vocabulary that allows them to read, interpret, and evaluate the work of other poets. A major portion
of the class will be given over to workshop sessions, where students can share and evaluate each other's work. Students will
also become familiar with a body of published poetry that illustrates techniques of expression, especially those that can be
applied, not only to poetry, but to other genres of creative writing. As a workshop, this course can be taken twice for credit.

END

Creative Nonfiction Workshop

MAWR 02515:

Teaching students the form, structure and techniques of creative nonfiction, this workshop-style course addresses the
issues of style, point of view, narrative and dramatic coherence as it applies to personal essay, the treatment of memory data,
the use of detail in scene-setting and the connection between fictional and poetic strategies in nonfiction writing. In
addition to their own work, students read and analyze contemporary creative nonfiction and classics in the genre; these texts
serve as models for students to help them locate themselves within the large framework of creative nonfiction. Students will
write several major pieces of varying lengths and types. As a workshop, this course can be taken twice for credit.

END

Writing the Novel

MAWR 02520:

Writing the Novel teaches students the structure, technique, and apparatus of the literary novel, and provides feedback
and guidance through extensive instructor critique and workshop-style evaluation. It is recommended that students
enrolling in this course have some prior practice in literary novel-writing or at least a strong background in reading the
literary novel. Students are required to submit four consecutive novel chapters with synopsis by the end of the course.

END

Writing the Memoir

MAWR 02523:

Students receive in-depth instruction in writing the memoir, one of the most engaging and popular literary forms today.
Students will read widely from selected memoirs, write three short memoirs that may stand alone or be interrelated, and
experience the workshop method of critiquing manuscripts. Students will focus on characterization, conflict, point-of-view,
and other literary elements traditionally associated with the narrative form as they develop their memoirs.

END

Writing the Graphic Novel: Theory and Practice

MAWR 02524:

This course explores the graphic novel genre and its incarnations through readings, writings, and discussion. An original
script for a graphic short story or beginning of a novel will be developed in a series of assignments, and discussed and
critiqued in a workshop environment. This course may not be offered annually.

END

Writing Genre Fiction

MAWR 02525:

Whether it involves walking through the woods speaking Elvish, visiting a distant planet, solving a crime, or staying the
night in a haunted house, genre writing captures audiences and transports them into the land of “what if.” In this class,
students will write long or short fiction in the genres of mystery, horror, fantasy, and sci-fi, exploring the conventions and
tropes each genre employs. Students will also study the ways in which published authors have used these genres to dig into
the human experience, and they will learn about the thriving publishing industry business that promotes these genres.

END

Writing Arts Learning Community

WA 01100:

This course orients incoming Writing Arts students to the major, the field, department faculty, publication options and
future careers. It provides information and advising for the major; introduces students to Writing Arts faculty and alumni,
as well as campus student clubs and publications; and establishes a cohort that can sustain community throughout students’
University careers.

END

Introduction to Writing Arts

WA 01200:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112

Introduction to Writing Arts familiarizes students with the disciplinary underpinnings of Writing Arts, providing a
background in the history of writing, current writing theories, writing as technology, and the writing professions. The course
covers these issues within the context of the Writing Arts major, enabling students to situate themselves in a community of
writers and language professionals and preparing them for upper-level cousework.

END

How Writers Read

WA 01201:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This sophomore-level course introduces students to theoretical methods of reading complex and sophisticated texts.
Students will study theories of reading and writing that concern structure, register, genre, intertextuality, and rhetorical
concerns. The course presents these theories and correlative methods through readings, and students then practice applying
these methods during class discussions and in writing using a series of self-selected texts as the objects of study.

END

Tutoring Writing

WA 01250:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This sophomore-level course introduces students to current theories and methods of tutoring writing. Students will study
theories concerning the writing process, the teaching of writing, the tutorial relationship, and issues related to working with
writers from a variety of backgrounds and abilities. The course presents these theories and methods through readings, and
students apply these methods through class discussions, tutoring observations, and tutoring in a variety of settings.
Throughout the course, students reflect on how methods of tutoring writing impact their development as writers.

END

The Writer's Mind - WI

WA 01300:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

The Writer's Mind increases students' understanding of themselves as writers by learning craft-specific approaches to
writing, and by developing critical awareness of their own and others' writing. Working in different genres of writing,
students will gain experience in effective revision strategies, in analyzing audience, and in visual aspects of the printed or
electronic page.

END

Writing, Research & Technology

WA 01301:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course presents the rhetorical, social, and practical dimensions of writing and researching in networked contexts.
Students analyze and compose with audio, video, image and text, using a variety of digital writing practices. Students blend
research methods informed by current literacy theories and modalities, allowing them to explore meaning-making,
circulation, and the ethical ramifications of writing within digital communities.

END

Introduction to Technical Writing - WI

WA 01302:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201 and 45 credits earned

This course introduces students to both the field of technical writing and the uses of technical writing within a variety of
professions. Students will learn how technical writers use document design strategies based on rhetorical principles to
respond to communication challenges. Through practice with a variety of genres, students will gain experience with
audience analysis, communication ethics, research, collaboration, professional style, and editing. The course culminates in a
writing project based on a professional, academic, or community issue of the student's choosing. Students are encouraged,
and will be assisted, in designing projects that reflect their professional interests.

END

Writing Creative Nonfiction-WI

WA 01304:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and WA 07290

Addressing craft and ethical concerns, this course introduces students to creative nonfiction. In the study of this “fourth
genre” of creative writing, focus is on those elements, e.g., imagery, characterization, diction, that make nonfiction creative.
Students will write in a number of subgenres, such as memoir, literacy journalism, and the personal essay, and will be exposed
to a variety of narrative structures. They will also read and analyze representative professional writing to provide contexts
for their own work, which will be critiqued by both the instructor and their peers. Special attention will be paid to the
evolution of the student writer’s personal voice.

END

Writing Comedy

WA 01305:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course introduces students to the strategies and tools writers of comedy use to educate, entertain, and move
audiences. Students will study a basic repertoire of rhetorical strategies, analyze how comedy writers employ these strategies
within a variety of forms of comedy, and then employ those same strategies to write their own comedic writing.

END

Writing Genre Fiction

WA 01306:

Prerequisites: WA 07290 or WA 07309

Whether it involves walking through the woods speaking Elvish, visiting a distant planet, solving a crime, or staying the
night in a haunted house, genre writing captures audiences and transports them into the land of “what if.” In this class,
students will write long or short fiction in the genres of mystery, horror, fantasy, and sci-fi, exploring the conventions and
tropes each genre employs. Students will also study the ways in which published authors have used these genres to dig into
the human experience, and they will learn about the thriving publishing industry business that promotes these genres.

END

Spoken Word Poetry

WA 01308:

In this course, students explore their roles as both writers and critics of performance poetry. Students work independently
and collaboratively to develop a set of vocabulary and critical approaches that enable engagement with spoken word poetry
on their aesthetic terms, while also identifying the best approaches to analyzing and delivering spoken word performances.
Through an examination of oral traditions and the impact of performance poetry, students develop an understanding of the
distinction between page versus stage poetry, while also learning craft-specific approaches and developing a critical
awareness of their own and others’ poetic work.

END

Research Practicum in Writing Arts I

WA 01311:

Prerequisites: 75 credits earned, approval of Writing Arts Dept., minimum 2.5 GPA

Students apply the theories and methodology learned in Writing Arts courses to a research mentorship with a member of
the department faculty. Students keep a detailed log of working hours, prepare a portfolio representative of their practicum
experience, write an analytical critique of the practicum, and are evaluated by their faculty mentor as well as the practicum
supervisor. May be taken concurrently with WA 01312 and/or WA 01313.

END

Research Practicum in Writing Arts II

WA 01312:

Prerequisites: 75 credits earned, approval of Writing Arts Dept., and minimum 2.5 GPA

Students apply the theories and methodology learned in Writing Arts courses to a research mentorship with a member of
the department faculty. Students keep a detailed log of working hours, prepare a portfolio representative of their practicum
experience, write an analytical critique of the practicum, and are evaluated by their faculty mentor as well as the practicum
supervisor. May be taken concurrently with WA 01311 and/or WA 01313.

END

Research Practicum in Writing Arts III

WA 01313:

Prerequisites: 75 credits earned, approval of Writing Arts Dept., and Minimum 2.5 GPA

Students apply the theories and methodology learned in Writing Arts courses to a research mentorship with a member of
the department faculty. Students keep a detailed log of working hours, prepare a portfolio representative of their practicum
experience, write an analytical critique of the practicum, and are evaluated by their faculty mentor as well as the practicum
supervisor. May be taken concurrently with WA 01311 and/or WA 01312.

END

Writing with Technologies

WA 01315:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and 60 earned credits

Writing with Technologies provides students with a theoretical basis for understanding the ways technologies - past,
present, and future - shape the collaborative construction of meaning inside and outside the classroom. Students are
encouraged to expand their repertoire of technologies and conduct research on contemporary writing practices to increase
critical awareness of the affordances and constraints writing technologies make available to them as future educators.

END

WA 01320:

Internship I in Writing Arts

Prerequisites: 75 credits earned and Writing Arts major with 2.5 Major GPA

Under professional supervision in the field, students practice theories and skills learned in the classroom. Students keep a
detailed log of working hours, prepare an extensive portfolio, write an analytical critique of the practicum, and are evaluated
by their faculty supervisor.

END

Internship II in Writing Arts

WA 01321:

Prerequisites: 75 credits earned and Writing Arts major with 2.5 Major GPA

Under professional supervision in the field, students practice theories and skills learned in the classroom. Students keep a
detailed log of working hours, prepare an extensive portfolio, write an analytical critique of the practicum, and are evaluated
by their faculty supervisor.

END

Writing for the Workplace-WI

WA 01322:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course introduces students to writing activities common to most careers. Assignments may include resumes and cover
letters, field and progress reports, and proposals. Students can also expect to deliver brief oral presentations.

END

Scientific Writing and Rhetoric

WA 01325:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

Scientific Writing and Rhetoric provides students with the tools to understand and critically analyze, evaluate, and
communicate scientific information. Students will gain familiarity with various genres of scientific writing and will practice
communicating scientific knowledge to specialized and non-specialized audiences, using a range of genres and mediums.
Students will also gain an understanding of the rhetorical nature of scientific knowledge and the role of scientific writing in
shaping public opinion, policy, and law.

END

Writing for Nonprofits-WI

WA 01326:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course is a junior level course that addresses the special technical and professional writing skills required for work in
the nonprofit sector. Students will develop a broad understanding of the unique communication challenges faced by
nonprofit organizations as they research and analyze the writing of various nonprofits and as they write in authentic
situations. This course explores how nonprofits communicate with their many audiences, and students will compose writing
typical of nonprofit organizations, including press releases and other public relations material, fundraising communications,
reports, and grant proposals. Students may also have the opportunity to engage in service learning by working with and for a
local area nonprofit.

END

Medical Writing and Rhetoric-WI

WA 01330:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course introduces students to a variety of genres of medical writing that exist in public and professional arenas.
Students will analyze the rhetorical and social elements of medical discourse in order to better understand medicine as a
discipline and culture and learn to produce texts that meet the needs of medical discourse communities. Topics might
include narrative medicine, medical rhetoric, health literacy, disability and health, and health provider-patient
communication. Students will practice writing in a number of genres such as pathographies, patient education materials,
medical reviews, public health campaigns, medical reports and proposals, and graduate school personal statements.

END

Environmental Writing and Rhetoric-WI

WA 01335:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

Environmental Writing and Rhetoric introduces students to the history and practice of environmental writing and
explores the challenges inherent in communicating about the natural world through text. Students will identify, critique, and
compose in a variety of genres ranging from nature writing to contemporary science reporting and develop skills like
conveying complex scientific information in clear prose and intervening in pressing environmental issues.

END

Rhetorics of Style-WI

WA 01350:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course introduces students to the theory and practice of writing with stylistic devices and strategies. Through
studying, analyzing, experimenting, and writing with a range of stylistic devices, students will develop a practical
understanding of how to put figural language to use for persuasive, expository, and aesthetic ends, as well as develop an
appreciation for the ethical implications of stylistic choices.

END

Editing for Publication

WA 01355:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course introduces students to the practice and profession of editing. Students will study a range of topics in editing,
including grammatical, stylistic, and ethical concerns, as well as reading for organization, flow, and accuracy. Through
hands-on practice with editing, students will gain greater sensitivity to language and knowledge of the work of professional
editors. Students will improve their ability to approach a range of texts with a growing competency in editing.

END

Self Publishing

WA 01356:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course considers the histories, technologies, and practices of self-publishing. Students will examine how writers have
historically made and circulated texts on their own for different rhetorical purposes — artistic, civic, academic, or
entrepreneurial — and have innovated using a variety of technologies in the process. They will then use these disparate
contexts and technologies to articulate professional trajectories that make use of emerging and self-made networks and
intermediaries as a pathway toward or alternative to traditional sponsorship. Rather than imagine themselves as writers who
inevitably must work with large publishing companies or major organizations in order to be heard, students will learn how
localized communities (such as those who produce zines, small presses, and e-books), production services (such as print on
demand and web hosts), and practices (such as niche marketing and crowdfunding) can support and sustain their writing in
the short- and long-term.

END

Teaching the Writer's Workshop-WI

WA 01358:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112

In this course, students will explore current theories of the Writer's Workshop, and will develop the skills and knowledge
necessary to facilitate a successful Writer's Workshop within early childhood, elementary, and middle school settings.

END

Professions in Writing Arts: Post-Graduate Options

WA 01370:

Prerequisites: WA 01200 and 30 credits earned

Professions in Writing Arts: Post-Graduate Options introduces students to the various and wide-ranging opportunities
available to writing arts students by exploring career, graduate school and other professional options in the field of writing.
Class topics may include statements of purpose and letters of application; internships, field experience, and volunteerism;
and publishing opportunities. Professionalism and entrepreneurial approaches to job seeking are also emphasized.
Discussions and workshops are supplemented by guest speakers and readings.

END

Writing about Popular Culture

WA 01375:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

Whether we are ranking the greatest gangster films of all time, arguing for the political importance of hip hop, or sharing
memes about the lifestyles of celebrities, the various forms of popular culture serve as important public spaces for making
meaning. This course considers the different ways writers respond to these forms as they analyze and situate pop culture
through reviews, interviews, rankings, features, and digital media. Students will read from a variety of critics and genres,
write and publish in these genres, and consider the ethical questions and rhetorical functions such texts present for pop
culture.

END

Special Topics Writing Arts

WA 01404:

This course has a changing focus that permits faculty to offer specialized seminars focusing on current trends in the field,
areas of faculty creative work and scholarship, or student requests. Students may take this course for credit more than once,
provided the subtitle is different. This course may not be offered annually.

END

WA 01406:

Professional Practices and Partnerships I

Prerequisites: First Semester Senior Year in 3+1 Applied Professional Communication program

Professional Practices and Partnerships I is a project-based practicum that prepares students for a variety of professional
communication careers. Students will synthesize their learning across the curriculum and learn best practices in their
specialty areas. They will construct portfolios and resumes that reflect their development toward their career goals. Students
also develop professional networks through interaction with guest speakers and industry experts in communication-related
regional business, startup, and non-profit organizations.

END

Professional Practices and Partnerships II

WA 01407:

Professional Practices and Partnerships II extends the goals Professional Practices and Partnerships I to prepare students
for a variety of professional communication careers. This course builds on PPPI’s professionalization strategies and
preparation for the job market through course readings, class discussions, and projects that encourage students to define a
career focus and refine professional goals.

END

Writing as Managers

WA 01408:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01102

This course provides Management students with extensive practice in preparing the written materials required by common
management activities. Assignments include preparing the written materials required for OSHA compliance, in disciplinary
situations, in alleged sexual harassment situations, and customer service. Other specific topical assignments will be
developed to respond to changes in the education needed by Management students.

END

Independent Study in Writing Arts Program

WA 01410:

This course provides students with an opportunity to work independently on specialized topics under the guidance of a
faculty member. Generally, this course cannot be substituted for any course offered by a department in the College of
Communication. Permissions are needed from the Department Chair and the Dean.

END

Situating Writing

WA 01415:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and 75 credits earned

Situating Writing provides students with the theoretical and practical tools they will need to work with young writers by
introducing methods of teaching and evaluating writing that are explicitly writer-centered. Students will develop their own
understandings of the process while learning how to respond to writing in ways that are situation-specific. Students will also
improve their own writing by collaborating with other writers, giving and receiving feedback on work in progress, and using
a range of technologies that facilitate feedback and revision.

END

Senior Seminar: Methods of Analysis and Evaluation of Writing

WA 01445:

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and WA 01200 and 90 credits earned

In this senior capstone course, students will expand their understanding of theories of reading and writing and apply these
theories to the analysis of various rhetorical artifacts. Students will complete the course having demonstrated rhetorical
adaptability in their analysis and evaluation of artifacts from multiple genres.

END

Writing Arts Portfolio Seminar

WA 01450:

Prerequisites: WA 01300 and WA 01301 and WA 01445

Seniors majoring in Writing Arts will have an opportunity to reflect on the work undertaken as part of the writing arts
major. The course asks students to construct and submit a portfolio consisting of work products both from those courses
included in the core and from a selection of courses in the required elective clusters. A written reflection on the intellectual
and learning experience derived from these courses as evidenced by the items included comprises the written requirement
for this course.

END

Creative Writing I

WA 07290:

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 or COMP 01105

This course concentrates on developing students' skills in writing various kinds of poems and in developing fiction
techniques. In addition to exploring different poetic forms, students learn how to create characters, establish conflict, and
develop a plot while writing a short story. Students examine the work of professional poets and fiction writers.

END

Creative Writing II

WA 07291:

Prerequisites: WA 07290 or CRWR 07290

Building upon the foundations learned in Creative Writing I, students in Creative Writing II will engage in more specific
practice in the conventions of short story writing, creative nonfiction and poetry. Students will have directed assignments
encouraging experimentation in multiple genres but will prepare a final portfolio that may give more emphasis to a genre of
their choice. Special emphasis will be placed on reading examples of these conventions and learning how writers graft or
borrow techniques (dialogue, dramatic monologue, voice, description) from one genre to apply it in another.

END

Writing Children's Stories

WA 07309:

Prerequisites: 30 credits earned

This course focuses on fiction written for juveniles and young adults. Students examine the rich variety of literature
published for young people. They do exercises, write complete stories, critique each other's writing in workshops and meet
with the teacher for individual conferences on their work. They also learn how to submit manuscripts to magazine and book
publishers.

END

Writing Fiction

WA 07391:

Prerequisites: WA 07290 or WA 07291 or CRWR 07290 or CRWR 07291

This class will provide a forum for students to explore the strategies fiction writers use in creative expression, especially in
writing the short story. Students will develop an analytical vocabulary that allows them to read, interpret, and evaluate the
work of other fiction writers. A major portion of the class will be given over to workshop sessions, where students can share
and evaluate each other's work. Students will also become familiar with a body of published short stories that illustrate
techniques of expression such as setting, point of view, characterization, dialogue, and other elements of fiction.

END

WA 07392:

This course covers the methods of developing and writing a play. During the course, students analyze plays, and outline and
work on the draft of a full-length play. This course may not be offered annually.

Fundamentals of Playwriting

END

WA 07395:

Writing Poetry

Prerequisites: WA 07290 or CRWR 07290

This class will provide a forum for students to explore the strategies poets use in creative expression. The students will
develop an analytical vocabulary that allows them to read, interpret, and evaluate the work of other poets. A major portion
of the class will be given over to workshop sessions, where students can share and evaluate each other's work. Students will
also become familiar with a body of published poetry that illustrates techniques of expression such as imagery, metaphor,
voice, tone, the music and strategy of the line, and other elements of poetry.

END

Writing the Young Adult Novel-WI

WA 07415:

Prerequisites: WA 07290 or WA 07309 and 45 credits

This course provides in-depth exploration and practice of writing the Young Adult Novel by reading and writing literature
intended for a young adult audience. It emphasizes student’s own writing and examines the craft of fiction and the elements
of Young Adult literature, including voice, characterization, theme, and plot, and the role these elements play in the Young
Adult genre.

END
