ACC 03210:

Principles of Accounting I

This course includes accounting theory and practice in the analysis of business transactions and the recording of business
data; complete accounting cycle; interpretation of financial data for sole proprietorships, partnerships, and corporations.

END

ACC 03211:

Principles of Accounting II

Prerequisites: ACC 03210

This course includes accounting theory and practice applied to corporations; budgeting and estimating; analysis and
comparison of cost and financial data.

END

ACC 03405:

Foundations of Accounting

This course presents an overview of accounting as an information system useful for decision making. It provides students
with an understanding of the basic concepts of financial and managerial accounting from the perspective of a future user of
accounting information.

END

ACC 03500:

Financial and Managerial Accounting

This course takes a managerial approach with emphasis on decision making. It includes financial statement analysis and
topics on determination of cost behavior using regression analysis and learning curves, activity-based costing, cost
allocation, performance measurement, and the decision making process.

END

ACC 03502:

Advanced Managerial Accounting

Prerequisites: ACC 03500

This course explores advanced managerial accounting topics, beyond the introductory topics covered in ACC 03500 –
Managerial Accounting, pertaining to the three basic managerial activities – planning, controlling and decision making.
Several of these topics are further explored through case study analysis and discussion. The course also utilizes data analytics
tools to better prepare students for challenges they face in the professional world.

END

ACC 03503:

Corporate and Partnership Taxes

This course presents an overview of the Federal Tax System relating to various business forms including corporations,
partnerships and exempt entities. Students will examine major tax legislation and judicial precedents with a focus on current
and pending legislation. Topics will include corporate organization, accumulations and liquidation, partnership formation, S
corporations, exempt organizations, estate and gift taxation, including trusts. Research and preparation software will be
used throughout the course.

END

ACC 03504:

Seminar in Auditing

Students will develop an understanding of the judgmental issues faced in providing audit and assurance services. Further
emphasis will be on the application of underlying accounting concepts to solve these judgmental issues. In addition, an
emphasis will be on the auditor's decision-making process and the nature and amount of evidence the auditor should
accumulate given engagement circumstances.

END

ACC 03505:

Seminar in Business Law

In this course, students study the legal aspects of sales, liability, secured transactions, commercial paper and consumer
credit. In addition, the course will emphasize legal analysis and research.

END

ACC 03506:

Advanced Domestic & International Accounting

This financial accounting course focuses on the accounting for corporate mergers and acquisitions, and the accounting and
financial reporting requirements of corporations with both domestic and international subsidiaries. It includes coverage of
international financial reporting comparability.

END

ACC 03507:

Government and Not-For-Profit Accounting

Prerequisites: ACC 03500

This financial accounting course focuses on the contemporary accounting issues of governmental and non-profit
organizations. It includes financial reporting, budgeting, forecasting and strategic planning in the environments of local,
state, and federal government, colleges and universities, hospitals, and voluntary health and welfare organizations.

END

ACC 03508:

Seminar and Research In Accounting

This seminar provides the opportunity for students to improve their professional research skills and advance their own
scholarly development in the accounting field. Taken after five graduate accounting and busienss law courses, it provides a
synthesis of prior learning. Students will work collaboratively with the professor and other enrolled students to develop and
complete a major research project and other assignments. Topics may include financial, not-for-profit, managerial, auditing,
or tax accounting.

END

ACC 03509:

Intermediate Financial Accounting

This course will include a review of the accounting process, the conceptual framework, the preparation of financial
statements and specific principles related to the accounting for current assets, property, plant and equipment, liabilities,
leases, income taxes, pensions, and shareholders' equity. Research and empirical evidence will be emphasized. This course is
restricted to students who have not taken Intermediate Accounting I and II at the undergraduate level.

END

ACC 03510:

Financial Statement Analysis

This course will take an expanded study of financial statement analysis from the point of view of the primary users of
financial statements: equity and credit analysts. The analysis and use of financial statements will also emphasize the
properties of numbers derived from these statements, business and asset valuation, and the importance and use of the notes
to the financial statements. Expanded data analytic skills will be emphasized.

END

ACC 03511:

Introduction to Federal Taxation

Prerequisites: Admission into MBA program or Admission into Certificate of Advanced Graduate Study in Accounting program.

This course provides an overview of Federal income tax concepts, including gross income, deductions, credits, gains and
losses from dispositions of property, deferred and tax exempt transactions, assignment of income, tax accounting, and other
special topics. Emphasis will be placed on interpreting the Internal Revenue Code and Regulations as well as case law.
Students will be required to show evidence of scholarly research through a major writing assignment on an emerging tax
issue.

END

ACC 03512:

Advanced Accounting Information Systems and Business Process Controls

This course is designed to give the MBA student an introduction to the important concepts related to accounting
information systems, with emphasis on enterprise risk management. An overview of internal control frameworks is used to
discuss pervasive, business process and application controls. A methodology for evaluating the risks and controls within a
defined business process is demonstrated and applied across the major business processes. Students will gain hands-on
experience with a leading Enterprise Resource Planning system and commercial computerized accounting software.

END

ACC 03513:

Financial Accounting Problems and Practice

This course provides an overview of accounting problems and concepts related to financial accounting and reporting. It
focuses on areas present in the Business Analysis and Reporting (BAR) Discipline section of the Uniform CPA Examination
including: (1) Accounting Research, (2) Financial Statements and Select Transactions of For-Profit Entities, (3) Cost
Accounting, (4) Financial Statement Analysis and Advanced Data Analytics, and (5) Financial Statements and Select
Transactions of Not-For-Profit Entities and State and Local Governments.

END

ACC 03514:

Accounting Legal Liability and Professional Responsibility

Prerequisites: MGT 98242

This course is a study of the legal liability of accountants and ethical concepts. It will cover the following areas: the ethical
role of the professional accountant, professional codes of conduct, ethical decision making, legal and regulatory obligations,
and corporate governance and ethical management.

END

ACC 03515:

Forensic Accounting

This course provides a broad overview of forensic accounting. It examines current issues of fraud, such as the nature of
fraud, types of fraud, identification, detection, and prevention of fraud. The course provides students with exposure to case
study, analytics and critical thinking in order to confirm the financial information is presented fairly.

END

ACC 03599:

Special Topics in Accounting

Prerquisite: ACC 03500 with minimum grade of C
Students will study advanced topics in Accounting. By design, the specific topical course content will change with time.
Contact the Business Graduate Office or the Accounting & Finance Department for details.

END

FIN 04300:

Principles of Finance

Prerequisites: ACC 03211 (may be taken concurrently) and STAT 02260 minimum grade of C- and (MATH 03125 or MATH 01130 or
MATH 01140 minimum grade of C-) and ECON 04101 and ECON 04102

This course includes the following topics: financial goals; depreciation, taxation and cashflows; financing the firm via
short-term, intermediate, and long-term debt, and preferred and common stock; capital budgeting and leasing; dividend
policy; and business growth and contraction.

END

FIN 04435:

International Financial Management

Prerequisites: FIN 04300 minimum grade of C

This course studies financial management in the international environment. Topics include foreign exchange risk
management, multinational working capital management, international portfolio investment, foreign direct investment,
capital budgeting for the multinational corporation, political risk, international financing and international financial
markets.

END

FIN 04500:

Financial Decision Making

Prerequisites: (ACC 03500 or ACC 03510) and MBA Foundation Courses

Students in this course will learn valuation techniques including adjusted present value, equity cash flows, and real-option
valuation. In addition to comparing alternative valuation techniques and the assumptions and limitations underlying each,
students will explore the technical difficulties and incentive effects caused by high leverage, the relation between capital
structure and capital costs, the interaction between a firm's financial structure and its business strategies, the conditions
contributing to potential under or over-valuation of a firm's prospects by the market, and the managerial consequences of
such misvaluation.

END

FIN 04505:

Advanced Financial Planning

Prerequisites: Admissions to the MBA or MS in Finance program

Financial planning is the process of meeting life goals through the proper management of finances. Life goals can include
buying a home, saving for your child's education or planning for retirement. Through sound financial planning individuals
can make decisions that will produce their desired results. In this course, students will learn foundations of financial
planning, managing basic assets, managing credit, managing insurance needs, managing investments and prepqring for
retirement and estate planning.

END

FIN 04510:

Independent Study: Finance

END

FIN 04511:

Quantitative Methods in Finance

Prerequisites: Admission to MBA or MS in Finance program

The objective of this course is to teach students the fundamentals of quantitative finance. The topics covered in the course
include asset returns and time value of money, probability and statistics in their applications to financial analysis, portfolio
theory and asset pricing models, regression and econometrics for financial data analysis, structure and pricing of financial
derivatives, risk quantification and management.

END

FIN 04512:

Capital Budgeting

Prerequisites: MBA Foundation Course requirements, contact MBA Office for details

This course includes the following topics: estimation of project cash flows, interest, annuity, and present value calculations,
evaluation of projects under conditions of certainty and risk, strategic planning in capital budgeting, and leasing.

END

FIN 04516:

Issues in Finance

Prerequisites: FIN 04500

This course includes the following topics: mergers and acquisitions, financial structure analysis, cost of capital analysis,
capital budgeting, portfolio management, financial institutions, money and capital markets, and international finance.

END

FIN 04518:

Derivative Securities and Financial Risk Management

Prerequisites: FIN 04600

In this course students will learn forward, future, option and swap contracts, and hedging, arbitrage, and derivatives-pricing
models. In addition, securitization and risk management concepts will be covered. Students will learn how to model and
evaluate derivative instruments and their applications to corporate strategy and risk management.

END

FIN 04520:

Financial Modeling

Prerequisites: FIN 04511 with minimum grade of C.

The objective of this course is to teach students the fundamentals and practice of building financial models by using
Microsoft Excel. Students become familiar with the built-in-functions of Excel and learn how to use them in financial model
building with a hands-on-approach. The topics covered in the course include financial statement modeling, cost of capital,
capital budgeting modeling, leasing, valuation analysis, portfolio modeling, capital-asset pricing models, option-pricing
models, real options modeling, bonds, and term structure modeling.

END

FIN 04530:

Multinational Financial Management

Prerequisites: FIN 04500 or Permission of Instructor and Admission to MBA or MS in Finance program

The objective of this course is to examine the managerial implications pertaining to the financial operations of the
multinational firms of the investments in the international arena. The standard topics in international finance, such as
exchange rate determination, foreign exchange risk (exposure), hedging techniques (using derivatives), international
corporate valuation and capital budgeting, and sources of funds and the cost of capital in the international bond, stock, and
money markets, are examined from a managerial point of view.

END

FIN 04540:

Financial Institutions Management

Prerequisites: Admissions to MBA or MS in Finance program or Permission of Instructor

In the course, students will learn about the many roles financial service-providers play in the economy today. Students will
examine how and why the financial services marketplace as a whole is rapidly changing, becoming new and different as we
move forward into the future. Students will also learn the techniques how to measure and manage various financial risks the
modern financial institutions face in today’s globally competitive financial environment, such as interest rate, market, credit,
liquidity, off balance sheet, foreign exchange, sovereign, technology and other operational risks.

END

FIN 04560:

Fixed Income Securities

Prerequisites: MSF Foundation Courses.

The objective of this course is to teach students the fundamentals of fixed income markets, covering different fixed
income security types, and the mathematics of their evaluation and risk management. The topics covered in the course
include fixed income security valuation, term structure of interest rates and the yield curve, fixed income risk quantification
and management, securities with embedded options, credit derivatives, interest rate derivatives, and portfolio management.

END

FIN 04599:

Special Topics in Finance

Prerequisites: FIN 04500 with minimum grade of C or Graduate Student in a College of Business Major

Students will study advanced topics in Finance. By design, the specific topical course content will change with time.
Contact the Business Graduate Office or the Accounting & Finance Department for details.

END

FIN 04600:

Investment Analysis and Portfolio Management

Prerequisites: MSF Foundation Courses

In this course students will analyze and develop an ability to deal with the following topics: investment values and market
price with regard to risk, return, portfolio diversification, taxes and inflation. Students will also examine the role of fixed
income securities versus common stock prices, yields, returns and valuations, warrants, options and future contracts, U.S.
and foreign securities markets, and the rapidly developing science of portfolio management as it applies to both the firm and
the individual.

END

ARHS 03520:

Art Since 1945

END

ART 02523:

Graduate Painting I

Advanced graduate work in concepts, techniques and media appropriate to contemporary painting and individual
expression.

END

ART 02524:

Graduate Painting II

Further advanced work in painting.

END

ART 02532:

Graduate Printmaking I

Advanced graduate work in concepts, techniques and media appropriate to contemporary printmaking and individual
expression. Permission of the instructor is strongly advised.

END

ART 02533:

Graduate Printmaking II

Further advanced work in printmaking.

END

ART 02535:

Advanced Graduate Problems In Art

Extensive in-depth work at the third or fourth graduate course level in a studies, art education or art history area arranged
with permission of the appropriate professor, the graduate advisor and department chairperson.

END

ART 02560:

Independent Study-Art

END

ART 09200:

Theory and Analysis of Art Education

This course provides students with an historical knowledge base of the theories, philosophies and persons that have
impacted the teaching of art in public schools. Assignments will actively engage learners in developing their own teaching
philosophies as they examine current theoretical and pedagogical research, and the national and state curriculum standards
for teachers and students of the visual arts.

END

ART 09520:

Jewelry I

Emphasis is on original metal design and construction, involving techniques and processes in the designing, forming and
finishing of utilitarian and decorative hand-wrought products.

END

ART 09521:

Jewelry II

Further advanced work. This course may not be offered annually.

END

ART 09529:

CERAMICS I

END

ART 09530:

CERAMICS II

END

SMED 31507:

GRAD PROBS

END

BINF 05555:

Bioinformatics: Advanced Biological Applications

This course in bioinformatics covers the application of modern computational and functional genomics methods to
current questions in biological and biomedical sciences. Bioinformatics approaches and philosophy will be highlighted
through exploration of research problems in cell and developmental biology, and ecology. Collaborative learning and
problem solving using computational, statistical and genomics methods will be emphasized. Students will design and carry
out collaborative research projects.

END

BINF 05560:

Advanced Programming for Molecular Biology

This Graduate level lecture course is designed for 1st & 2nd year students in the Masters in Bioinformatics Program.
Students will learn the programming skills necessary to be competent in writing programming to analyze primary research
data. Specifically, students will expand on their understanding of basic unix command line programming and further develop
fluency in programming languages, including Python and R (specifically analytics not visualization). This course will involve
considerable practical application, and students will learn to analyze data critically, design experiments, collect and interpret
data, create graphs and figures, and present their results in oral presentations.

END

BINF 07500:

Bioinformatics Seminar

Prerequisites: CHEM 07595 and BIOL 05555 and CS 07595

This advanced literature survey course in bioinformatics covers current and emerging topics in the field of Bioinformatics
through the analysis of current primary literature. The multidisciplinary nature of bioinformatics will be highlighted
through examples of computational approaches to solving biological, biochemical, and applied biomedical research
problems. Emphasis is placed on the interplay between computational methods and how they are applied to solve real
problems in biology and biochemistry. Students will engage in semester-long research projects culminating in a presentation
of a topic from the primary literature.

END

BINF 07501:

MS Thesis Research 1

Prerequisites: Matriculation into M.S. Bioinformatics

This is the first semester of research in Bioinformatics for students pursuing a MS degree with thesis. Thesis project
outline and thesis committee must be selected and approved PRIOR to the start of this course.

END

BINF 07502:

MS Thesis Research 2

Prerequisites: BINF 07501

This is the second semester of research in Bioinformatics for students pursuing a MS degree with thesis. Thesis project
outline and thesis committee must be selected and approved PRIOR to the start of this course. This course is an extension
of the project undertaken as part of MS Thesis Research 1 (BINF 07501)

END

BINF 07503:

MS Thesis Research 3

Prerequisites: BINF 07502

This is the third semester of research in Bioinformatics for students pursuing a MS degree with thesis. Thesis project
outline and thesis committee must be selected and approved PRIOR to the start of this course. This course is an extension
of the project undertaken as part of MS Thesis Research 2 (BINF 07502)

END

BINF 07504:

MS Thesis Research 4

Prerequisites: BINF 07503 and permission of the Instructor

This is the fourth semester of research in Bioinformatics for students pursuing a MS degree with thesis. Thesis project
outline and thesis committee must be selected and approved PRIOR to the start of this course. This course is an extension
of the project undertaken in MS Thesis Research 3 (BINF 07503).

END

BINF 07505:

M.S. Thesis Research 5

Prerequisites: BINF 07504

This is the fifth course in a series of in Bioinformatics Thesis research courses for students pursuing a MS degree with
thesis. Thesis project outline and thesis committee must be selected and approved PRIOR to the start of this course. This
course is an extension of the project undertaken in MS Thesis Research 4 (BINF 07504).

END

BINF 07510:

Bioinformatics

This Graduate level survey course in bioinformatics covers the application of modern computational methods to the
fundamentals of molecular biology (protein and DNA structure, transcription and translation). The multidisciplinary nature
of bioinformatics will be highlighted through examples of computational approaches to solving biological, biochemical, and
applied biomedical research problems. Emphasis is placed on the interplay between computational methods and how they
are applied to solve problems in biology and biochemistry.

END

BINF 07595:

Bioinformatics: Advanced Biochemical Applications

Prerequisites: CHEM 07548

This introductory course in bioinformatics covers the application of modern computational methods to the fundamentals
of molecular biology (protein and DNA structure, transcription and translation). The biochemical tools of molecular biology
will be discussed. Methods of aligning DNA sequences will be studied in relation to mutations, phylogenic tree analysis,
forensic science, and genetic diseases. Algorithms for protein structure prediction, microarray technology and gene
expression will be explored. Computer based lab exercises will support the topics presented. Students will be required to do
a literature based research project.

END

BIOL 01100:

Biology I

This course studies the chemical properties of protoplasm; cell structure and cell division; metabolic processes in
organisms, including photosynthesis and respiration; principles of genetics including Mendelian laws; evolution and
ecological relationships of organisms.

END

BIOL 01104:

Introduction to Evolution and Scientific Inquiry

Prerequisites: MATH 01100 to 01499 or STAT 02100 to 02499 or MATH 03100 to 03499 with min of grade of D- or S02 min score
550 or S12 min score 570 or A02 min score 24 or ALG min score 77 or CLM/CLMR min score 40

This laboratory course is designed for freshman Biology majors and is the first of a four-course introductory sequence. This
course introduces students to organismal diversity and its evolutionary origins, covers the fundamental concepts of
evolutionary theory, and surveys many of the ways that organisms have become adapted to their environments. In addition,
students in this course will learn some of the basic skills necessary for scientific inquiry, including the scientific method,
critical thinking, experimental design, and the gathering, analysis, and presentation of quantitative data. Credit will not be
given for both Introduction to Evolution and Scientific Inquiry (BIOL 01104) and Biology I (BIOL 01100). Priority for
enrollment will be given to students declared as Biology majors, Biology minors, Bioinformatics majors, Computer Science
majors, Biochemistry majors, Environmental Studies majors, Environmental Studies minors, or Pre-Medical concentration.

END

BIOL 01106:

Introduction to Genetics

Prerequisites: BIOL 01104 with C- or better and CHEM 06100 with minimum Grade of D-

This course is designed for first year biology majors and builds on skills and knowledge gained by the students from
Introduction to Evolution and Scientific Inquiry. The course focuses on the study of genetic factors in bacteria, viruses,
higher plants and animals. The principles of Mendelian, molecular and population genetics will be introduced. Discussion of
genetic applications in agriculture, biotechnology, and medicine will be an integral part of the course. The laboratory
projects will provide the students with the opportunity to gain hands-on experience with the most common classical and
molecular genetics methods. Credit will not be given for both Introduction to Genetics (BIOL 01106) and Biology II (BIOL
01101).

END

BIOL 01113:

General Biology: Human Focus

This one-semester laboratory course provides an introduction to the basic concepts of the biological sciences, including,
but not limited to, cell biology, the body plan and organ systems of vertebrate animals, genetics and heredity, and vertebrate
evolution. Emphasis will be placed on how these topics relate to the human organism. Laboratory exercises enable the
student to visualize many of the concepts discussed in class. No credit toward biology major.

END

BIOL 01202:

Biological Skills for Transfer Students

Prerequisites: BIOL 01100 and BIOL 01101

This laboratory course is designed for students transferring into the Biology major after having completed Biology I and
Biology II at another institution. This course will review key topics covered in Introduction to Evolution and Scientific
Inquiry, Introduction to Genetics, and Introduction to Cell Biology (BIOL 01104, BIOL 01106, and BIOL 01203) while
introducing students to a variety of scientific skills covered in those courses. Examples of skills include critical thinking,
experimental design, reading of primary literature, data collection, analysis, and interpretation, and oral and written
scientific presentations. Credit will not be given for both Introduction to Cell Biology (BIOL 01203) and Biological Skills for
Transfer Students (BIOL 01202).

END

BIOL 01203:

Introduction to Cell Biology

Prerequisites: BIOL 01106 with C- or better

This laboratory course introduces students to the fundamentals of cell biology, including the cellular basis of life, cell
evolution, cellular organization, cell metabolism, cell diversity, cell-cell communication, intracellular signaling and the
cellular basis of disease.

END

BIOL 01599:

INDEP STUDY

END

BIOL 10210:

Human Anatomy and Physiology I

This course offers a molecular, cellular and systematic approach to the structure and function of the component units and
organizational systems of humans. Emphasis is placed on cells, tissues, membrane physiology and the skeletal, muscular and
nervous systems.

END

BIOL 10212:

Human Anatomy and Physiology II

This laboratory course focuses on the gross and microscopic structure of the body. The course is the second semester of a
two-semester sequence that covers all of the functional systems of the human organism. In this course, the systems of the
body to be studied in detail include the endocrine, cardiovascular, respiratory, excretory, digestive, and reproductive
systems. Whole body metabolism and fluid balance will also be studied.

END

BIOL 11330:

Microbiology

Prerequisites: BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 01211 with C- or better

This course deals with the morphology and physiology of unicellular organisms, with emphasis upon bacteria. It studies
culture methods, growth parameters, isolation, identification and characterization, and metabolism of microorganisms in
the laboratory.

END

BIOL 14440:

Introduction to Biochemistry - Lecture Only

Prerequisites: (BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 01211 or BIOL 01202 with C- or better) and CHEM 07201 with D- or better

This course investigates chemical compounds and chemical reactions which are of paramount importance to the
functioning of biological systems. It also examines the major metabolic pathways for energy production and biosynthesis.

END

BIOL 14540:

Introduction to Biochemistry I

Prerequisites: (BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 01211 or BIOL 01202 with C- or better) and CHEM 07201 with D- or better

This course is concerned with the chemical compounds and chemical reactions which are of paramount importance to the
functioning of biological systems. The major metabolic pathways for energy production and biosynthesis are examined. The
requirements include a research paper or individual project. Admission to the course is at the discretion of the Graduate
Advisor. This course may not be offered annually.

END

BIOL 22335:

Advanced Genetics

Prerequisites: BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 01211 or BIOL 01202 with C- or better

The course will provide an in-depth background in all areas of Mendelian, molecular, population and evolutionary genetics.
The students will learn how to use genetic tools in dissecting complex biological pathways, developmental processes and
regulatory systems. Discussion of landmark genetic experiments will constitute the basis of an inquiry-based approach that
will delineate the dynamic nature of modern genetics. The laboratory exercises are designed to put special emphasis on
molecular biology techniques and the use of bioinformatics.

END

BIOL 27503:

Concepts of Comparative Embryology

This graduate laboratory course focuses on the morphological and physiologic processes involved in embryogenesis of
animals. The course includes the development of echinoderms, amphibians, birds, and mammals. Considerable emphasis
will be placed on organogenesis and the development of organ systems.

END

CBS 01510:

Molecular Foundations of Biological Systems

This is a core course in the Complex Biological Systems graduate program. This course will emphasize the diversity of
biological molecules, macromolecular complexes, and subcellular structures. Problem-based approaches will address
molecular questions from various research angles to develop students’ inquisitive research skills. Students will learn how the
combination of experimental and computational techniques allows understanding of life at the molecular level from
individual molecules to systems molecules that underpin subcellular functions.

END

CBS 01520:

Cellular Foundations of Biological Systems

This is a core course in the Complex Biological Systems graduate program. This course will emphasize the diversity of
cellular characteristics and functions in unicellular and multicellular organisms and the ability of cells to interact, respond to
their environment and create biological networks. Problem-based approaches will be used to address cellular questions from
various research angles to develop student inquisitive research skills. Students will learn about investigative and
experimental methodologies to address relevant questions in modern cell biology.

END

CBS 01530:

Organismal Foundations of Biological Systems

This is a core course in the Complex Biological Systems graduate program. This course will emphasize the relationship
between organismal form and function with an emphasis on natural selection and the effects of evolutionary history.
Problem-based approaches will address organismal questions from various research angles to develop students’ inquisitive
research skills. Students will learn about investigative and experimental methodologies to address relevant questions in
modern organismal biology. Topics will include a unifying biological problem shared with other foundational courses (e.g.,
biological impacts of pollutants) to provide students with analyses at the organismal scale of that problem as part of a
cohesive body of scientific knowledge across scales.

END

CBS 01540:

Biological Networks and Systems

This is a core course in the Complex Biological Systems graduate program. This course will address the interactions of
organisms with each other and with their environment. Students will engage in problem-based learning using
context-focused, ecological analysis of biological problems. Analysis will focus on biological problems by examining these
interactions at the highest level of organization that applies for the particular problem. For example, symbiotic
relationships, population-level phenomena, and ecosystems might be appropriate lenses for examining a given problem area.

END

CBS 01550:

Thesis Research

This course provides individual laboratory research experience on a topic within the general field of biosciences. The
research is performed under the supervision of a faculty instructor/graduate advisor and will thus vary based upon the
training and expertise of the research team. Students are expected to (1) conduct basic and applied research in biosciences,
(2) retrieve and review relevant research literature, (3) provide periodic updates and project reports, (4) write abstracts for
presentations at conferences and meetings, and (5) manuscripts for publication in scientific journals. Overall, this research
should build longitudinally towards production of an original M.S. or Ph.D. thesis/dissertation.

END

CBS 01560:

Fundamentals of Teaching for Biological Sciences

This 3 credit graduate-level course will be an introduction to the science and practice of teaching undergraduate biology.
Course topics will be broadly applicable across the many biological subdisciplines, by focusing on effective, evidence-based
teaching strategies that have been demonstrated to support engagement and learning within a diverse student body. We will
use a discussion-based format to study the theory and research of teaching science, and to put it into practice in the
classroom and laboratory.

END

CBS 01570:

Computational Methods and Data Analysis in Biological Systems

Prerequisites: CBS 01510 and CBS 01520 and CBS 01530 and CBS 01540

This course will introduce students to the types and structures of data, computational methods, and principles of data
analysis across various scales of biological complexity (molecular, cellular, organismal, systems/networks). Students will learn
methods at each scale and apply those methods to a unifying problem area common across all foundational courses. They
will also apply those methods to an individual problem area. The individual analysis will be prepared as a written report and
oral presentation. This course will prepare students to conduct data-driven analysis of complex biological systems at
multiple scales.

END

CBS 01580:

Integrative Analysis of Biological Problems

Prerequisites: CBS 01510 and CBS 01520 and CBSS 01530 and CBS 01540

This course synthesizes holistic understanding of biological problems across all scales. Students will be guided through
comprehensive analysis of a modern challenge in biological science. They will then execute individual analyses of a modern
biological challenge/problem using primary and secondary literature. The individual analysis will be prepared as a written
report and oral presentation. This course will prepare students to conduct scientific investigations across scales/levels of
organization and to recognize the connections between methods and principles at disparate scales of complex biological
systems.

END

CBS 01590:

Graduate Seminar

This course will serve as a cornerstone of the Complex Biological Systems graduate program. Students will learn a holistic
understanding of biological problems across all scales via attendance of talks by invited speakers, by presenting updates of
their own research, and by “journal club”-style discussions of published peer reviewed research.

END

CHEM 05502:

Clinical Laboratory Science Seminar

Prerequisites: Matriculation into M.S. Clinical Laboratory Science or COGS Clinical Laboratory Science

This graduate course serves as a capstone course in clinical laboratory science. Students will review, discuss and present on
core and emerging topics relating to clinical laboratory science.

END

CHEM 09501:

Advanced Clinical Chemistry Laboratory

Corequisite(s): CHEM 09500

This graduate laboratory course provides hands-on training in selected techniques and approaches to clinical chemistry. 
This course is taken concurrently with CHEM 09500 Advanced Clinical Chemistry.

END

MCB 01101:

Foundations in Biology for Biomedical Sciences I

This laboratory course is the first of the two semester sequence designed for students not majoring in Biology but
interested in pursuing studies in biomedical areas through advanced Biology courses. This sequence serves as an
introductions to fundamental biological concepts and the foundation for upper-level biology courses for such students. Both
courses of the sequence focus on genetics, cell biology, and evolution and theory relation to human health. This course
focuses more specifically on the molecular basis of variation and heredity and its evolutionary context.

END

MCB 01102:

Foundations in Biology for Biomedical Sciences II

Prerequisites: BIOL 01205 or MCB 01101

This laboratory course is the second of the two semester sequence designed for students not majoring in Biology but
interested in pursuing studies in biomedical areas through advanced Biology courses. This sequence serves as an
introduction to fundamental biological concepts and the foundation for upper-level biology courses for such students. Both
courses of the sequence focus on genetics, cell biology, and evolution and their relation to human health. This course focuses
on molecular and cellular mechanisms of life and their evolutionary context.

END

MCB 01360:

Biophysics I

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 OR MCB 01102

This course is aimed at understanding the physics of biological systems. The goal of the course is to quantitatively define
biological systems and their functions. Key emphasis will be placed on (1) understanding theories, laws, and axioms that
govern systems and their behavior and (2) the use of physics to determine quantitative information about systems and their
behaviors. For each topic, the basic laws of physics will be reviewed followed by their application to specific biomolecular or
biological system examples. The laboratory component is aimed at giving students hands-on experience in measurement and
observation for biological systems.

END

MCB 01506:

Graduate Translational Cell Biology

This graduate course focuses on advanced translational approaches of cellular processes towards analysis, diagnostics, and
treatment of human diseases. Topics including biological causes of cellular and metabolic diseases, molecular diagnostics,
gene therapy, and stem cell therapy will be addressed.

END

MCB 01507:

Advanced Molecular Microbiology

Advanced Molecular Microbiology course will address concepts that are essential for understanding of the molecular
biology of microorganisms: environmental sensing and signal transduction pathways; regulation of gene expression:
transcription, bacterial operons, and post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms; bacterial cell division and its regulation,
bacterial cell wall biosynthesis, mechanisms of adherence and invasion, molecular mechanisms of bacterial persistence and
antibiotic resistance. This course provides students with opportunities to study advanced methods of genetic engineering:
DNA cloning, the nature, selection and design of DNA cloning vectors, restriction enzymes, modifying enzymes,
polymerases, bacterial transformation, Western blot, and other tools and techniques used in molecular biology. Some
aspects of bioinformatics and genomics, as well as other advanced molecular technologies will be discussed. Overall this
course will aid understanding of fundamental aspects of the molecular biology of microorganisms as they relate to
biomedical sciences.

END

MCB 01508:

Advanced Topics in Molecular & Cellular Biosciences

This Graduate level lecture course is designed for graduate students in the Masters in Bioinformatics Program. Topics
discussed will investigate areas (e.g. Epigenetics, Cancer Biology, Systems Biology) and/or innovative approaches to treating
disease (e.g. Gene Editing, Immunotherapy, Precision Medicine). Students will be expected to perform literature reviews to
determine the current status in the particular area of study. This course will involve review of current literature, critical
reasoning and group discussion, as well as written and/or oral reports.

END

MCB 01514:

Infectious Agents

This course aims at preparing students for health professions and biomedical research by exploring host-pathogens
interactions. Infectious agents among viruses, bacteria, parasites and/or fungi will be selected to examine life cycles,
interaction with hosts and pathogenicity. Translational use of pathogens in disease prevention and therapies will also be
explored. In this course, students will also develop research proposals on selected infectious agents.

END

MCB 01521:

Graduate Cell Culture Techniques

This graduate course features hands-on instruction in the techniques, methodologies, principles, and applications of
mammalian cell culture. The students will learn principles of cell culture in monolayers and suspension as well as concepts of
cell proliferation, viability, differentiation and tissue histology. Stem cell phenotypes and differentiation genetic marker
profiles will be compared for adipogenesis, chondrogenesis, and osteogenesis.

END

MCB 01534:

Advanced Medical Biochemistry

This course is intended to introduce graduate students to fundamental biochemical principles relating to disease states.
This will include structure and function of biomolecules, biochemical pathways in cells, and cellular processed relevant to
diseases and medical disorders. Special emphasis will be placed on reviewing and evaluating peer-reviewed medical literature.
Students in this course should have taken at least one previous course in biochemistry.

END

MCB 01538:

Graduate Immunology

This graduate course studies infection and resistance and the principles and types of immunity and hypersensitivity.
Laboratory applications include: antigen-antibody formation, structure and reactivities.

END

MCB 01550:

Graduate Molecular Genetics

This graduate course considers the principal concepts in biochemical genetics including gene function and regulation,
DNA replication, and mutation. Laboratories focus on fundamental biotechnology concepts and techniques.

END

MCB 22450:

Molecular Genetics

Prerequisites: BIOL 01203 or MCB 01102 or BIOL 0211 or BIOL 01202 with C- or better and at least least Junior status

This course considers the principal concepts in biochemical genetics including gene function and regulation, DNA
replication, and mutation. Laboratories focus on fundamental biotechnology concepts and techniques.

END

MCB 22598:

Human Genetics

Patterns of transmission of single gene traits, human biochemical genetics, autosomal and sex-linked chromosomal
anomalies, immunogenetics and blood groups, screening for genetic diseases and prenatal diagnosis. Lecture, laboratory
sessions or the equivalent. This course may not be offered annually.

END

TBS 01570:

Advanced Topics in Biomedical Instrumentation

This course provides an in-depth examination of the types of instruments that students may encounter when conducting
research in a pre-clinical or hospital setting. The class primarily focuses on instruments that are used in diagnostic and
therapeutic applications of biomedical research ranging from small animals (e.g., mice) to humans. Some examples include
ultrasound, x-ray, nuclear, and magnetic resonance imaging methods, as well as combined platforms and therapeutic
approaches. Students will learn about the theory behind the instruments, their principle components and operations, and
how they are used to positively affect human lives. The course utilizes primary scientific literature, and students will be
expected to contribute towards a publishable review article on a given instrument or technique. The goal of the course is for
students to develop a proficient knowledge of the diverse types of instrumentation that they will likely utilize in a career in
translational and/or clinical biomedical research.

END

BME 11550:

Advanced Biocompatibility and Immunoengineering

This course covers advanced topics in biocompatibility and the body's response to foreign materials, with an emphasis on
material properties and the cell and molecular biology of the immune system. The course explores the various signaling
mechanisms used by cells when presented with foreign and engineered antigens, and then applies engineering principles to
the discovery and design of novel biomaterials and therapeutics that are biocompatible. State of the art topics in current
literature related to biocompatibility and immunoengineering will be explored.

END

BME 11551:

Advanced Mechanobiology

This course will provide students with a thorough understanding of how mechanics dictate cell function and how this
knowledge can be applied to the prevention and treatment of disease. Students will learn how mammalian cells interact with
the complex 3D environment that surrounds them in tissues including how cellular behavior is affected by the extracellular
matrix. The course also addresses the specific cell response to mechanical stimuli and how this can be used in tissue
engineering and regenerative medicine applications. Additional topics include: extracellular matrix structure and function,
cell-matrix interactions and cell signaling, mechanics of the extracellular matrix, and mechanotransduction. State of the art
topics in current literature related to mechanobiology will be explored.

END

BME 11552:

Advanced Cell Bioelectricity

The objective of this course is to develop quantitative and qualitative understanding of the generation and transmission of
bioelectricity in and between excitable cells. Topics include: circuit analysis and modeling of potentials and currents across
the cellular membrane, action potentials, propagation of potentials along the cellular membrane,and electrical stimulation of
excitable tissue. State of the art topics in current literature related to cell bioelectricity will be explored.

END

BME 11553:

Regulatory Strategies in Biomedical Engineering

This course examines domestic and foreign regulatory practices associated with biomedical devices and/or products. It will
cover the processes and protocols used by the FDA in order to better prepare students to be significant contributors to the
development of a biomedical product that meets or exceeds all the applicable standards, regulations, and laws that apply to
its applicable technology. Students will examine regulatory strategy for specific medical devices and products.

END

BME 11554:

Advanced Stem Cell Engineering

Prerequisites: Must have Graduate standing or fully executed Senior Privilege Paperwork

Although stem cells can differentiate into numerous cell types, their therapeutic potential is limited by the inability to
reliably control stem cell behavior outside of the body. To increase the clinical use of stem cells, it is important to
understand how stem cells interpret extracellular signals and to use this information to design materials that control stem
cell behavior in vitro and in vivo. This course will cover stem cell biology, mechanobiology, and techniques to engineer
materials with biochemical and biophysical signals that regulate stem cell growth and differentiation.

END

BME 11555:

Fundamentals of Synthetic Biology

Prerequisites: Must have Graduate standing or fully executed Senior Privilege Paperwork

Synthetic biology integrates many scientific disciplines with the goal to rapidly and reliably reprogram or design new
biological systems. It has applications in a wide range of areas including manufacturing, biosensors, therapeutics, and even
synthetic life. This course provides in-depth coverage of techniques and real-world applications of synthetic biology through
analysis of current primary literature in the field. Topics include: cell free systems, biomanufacturing, CRISPR, plant syn
bio, mammalian syn bio, therapeutic applications, safety mechanisms, and ethics.

END

BME 11556:

Advanced Nanoparticle Design and Engineering

Prerequisites: Must have Graduate standing or fully executed Senior Privilege Paperwork

This course will provide students with an introduction to the need for nanoparticle technologies for drug delivery to treat
diseases and their benefits over freely delivered therapeutics. Students will learn how to apply engineering principles to the
development and design of nanotechnology for drug delivery. This course also addresses how nanoparticle technologies
interact with biological systems and how they can be targeted to specific tissues to maximize delivery and therapeutic
efficiency. Additional topics include: disease applications, bioconjugation strategies, in vitro and in vivo experimental
techniques to study drug delivery, nanoparticle characterization, nanoparticle synthesis, and the clinical implementation of
nanoparticle technologies. The graduate level course will also include implementation of the course material via projects and
presentations spanning project development thorough clinical translation.

END

BME 11561:

Advanced Topics in Biomedical Instrumentation

Prerequisites: Graduate student status or Instructor permission

This course provides an in-depth examination of the types of instruments that students may encounter when conducting
research in a pre-clinical or hospital setting. The class primarily focuses on instruments that are used in diagnostic and
therapeutic applications of biomedical research ranging from small animals (e.g., mice) to humans. Some examples include
ultrasound, x-ray, nuclear, and magnetic resonance imaging methods, as well as combined platforms and therapeutic
approaches. Students will learn about the theory behind the instruments, their principle components and operations, and
how they are used to positively affect human lives. The course utilizes primary scientific literature, and students will be
expected to contribute towards a publishable review article on a given instrument or technique. The goal of the course is for
students to develop a proficient knowledge of the diverse types of instrumentation that they will likely utilize in a career in
translational biomedical engineering and science research.

END

BME 11568:

Advanced Phenomena in Biomaterials Science

This course is aimed at applying material properties and technology to regulate and support biological systems and
functions at the graduate level. A goal of the course is to fundamentally understand variable biomaterials and their
interactions with biological systems, (cells, tissues, organs). A second goal is to use material properties and technology as a
tool to understand biomaterials for artificial tissues and organs, or devices and sensors. Finally, students will learn and
understand public healthcare policies, needs, and resources.

END

BME 11573:

Biomaterials Engineering

The goal of studying biomaterials is to understand how the body's natural tissues are organized on a compositional,
structural, and properties basis. We also seek to understand how the body recognizes and responds to foreign materials, and
to combine this knowledge in order to successfully design implants that can be used to treat debilitating diseases.

END

BME 11574:

Advanced Topics in Controlled Release

Prerequisites: Must have Graduate standing or fully executed Senior Privilege Paperwork

Controlled release systems are designed to provide delivery of an agent at a pre-determined rate for an extended period of
item. Controlled release offers several advantages over traditional methods of formulation and administration: maintenance
of effective concentrations for a sustained period, less total agent required, cost effectiveness, convenience and compliance.
This course introduces students to engineering fundamentals applied to controlled release systems. Basic principles of
materials, mass transfer, heat transfer, fluid flow and chemical reactions are used to analyze and design controlled release
systems. Applications to pharmaceutical, agricultural, and food industries will be explored. Laboratory experiments and
demonstrations will be integrated throughout the course.

END

BME 11590:

Advanced Emerging Topics in Biomedical Engineering

This course provides timely coverage of specific advanced topics in Biomedical Engineering, and it is intended for graduate
students. Special topics courses may be traditional classroom-based courses as well as research-related courses supervised by
specific advisors. This class may be taken multiple times when offered with a different special topics content.

END

BME 11600:

Graduate Seminar in Biomedical Engineering Topics

The students will study current research topics and skills relevant to Biomedical Engineering.

END

BME 11602:

Writing and Winning Grant Proposals in the Biomedical Field

The students will learn aspects of writing in the biomedical field related to academic and industry career topics with a focus
on grant proposal preparation.

END

BME 11610:

Special Topics for Doctoral Students in Biomedical Engineering

The students will study advanced level topics in Biomedical Engineering.

END

BME 11611:

Biological Transport Phenomena

Biological Transport Phenomena concerns the integrated study of momentum, mass, and energy transfer and its
application to characterize physiological and cellular processes. In this course, students will apply principles of fluid, mass,
and heat transport to a broad range of problems related to biological systems and biomedical devices. At the end of the
course students will apply these principles to present a biomedical solution related to their personal research and/or a
clinically-relevant problem.

END

PMED 01210:

Intro to Public Health

Prerequisites: Admission to Advanced Premedical Studies Post-Baccalaureate Program at Cooper Medical School of Rowan University

This course introduces many fields within the
public health system, and the work in measuring health, disease and illness. It offers learners an understanding of population
health through multiple disciplines like: epidemiology, biostatistics, environmental and occupational health, social and
behavioral health, health policy and management. Students analyze contemporary public health issues such as threats to the
nation's food industry, health promoting behaviors related to disease prevention, the burden and distribution of infectious
diseases in our nation and globally, public health's role in disaster preparedness and management, and bioterrorism. Students
explore the role of law and government (local, state, national, and international) in public health and challenging public
health policy issues related to spiraling healthcare costs and addressing the aging population. Students examine
environmental and occupational health issues and the impact of future challenges in public health. In many ways, the course
will be critical to the student's career in medicine. A firm foundation in the basic science of health and disease processes will
ensure that the student is able to apply these principles to their clinical performance as medical students and as practicing
physicians. It will be a hybrid course with online lectures and the use of clinical case studies in an active learning
environment.

END

PMED 01220:

Applied Medical Ethics

Prerequisites: Admission to Advanced Premedical Studies Post-Baccalaureate Program

This is the second humanities course in the postbaccalaureate program. This course provides an overview of current
approaches to resolving ethical issues facing clinicians in private office and hospital practices and academic medical settings.
This course will serve to enhance the professional development of premedical students as well as provide the academic
framework needed for medical school preparation. This course will serve as a valuable resource for students interested in
pursuing a career in biomedical sciences. This course is a hybrid course with online content enhanced through and the
integration of case studies in active learning environment sessions.

END

PMED 01310:

Medical Biochemistry, A Clinical Approach

Prerequisites: Admission to Advanced Premedical Studies Post-Baccalaureate Program

Biochemistry is the study of the myriad of chemical processes that occur within living organisms. This course will introduce the major
macromolecules of life, including nucleic acids, proteins, carbohydrates and lipids, as interacting partners that provide
structure and function to cells. The course will provide the student with a rigorous foundation for application of metabolic
principles to other course selections in the Post-Bac program and will be critical to the student's performance in the first
and second years of medical school. A firm foundation in the basic science of health and disease processes at the
biochemical level will ensure that the student is able to apply these principles to their clinical performance as medical
students and as practicing physicians. It will be a hybrid course with online lectures and the use of clinical case studies in an
active learning environment. Upon completion of the course, it is expected that students will understand the basic structure
and function of the major cellular macromolecules and the processes in which they participate, as well as an understanding
of the types of diseases that may develop when cellular chemical processes go awry.

END

PMED 01320:

Cellular Basis of Molecular & Regenerative Medicine

Prerequisites: PMED 01.310 and Admission to Advanced Premedical Studies Post-Baccalaureate Program

This course involves the study of the individual eukaryotic cell and tissues and will begin with an introduction to cell theory. 
Topics that will be discussed are: the structure and functions of the plasma membrane, nucleus, mitochondria, lysosomes, endoplasmic reticulum and the golgi apparatus. 
The course will then progress to provide the student with a strong understanding of the fundamental concepts of regenerative medicine and
stem cell biology and their potential to alter current medical treatment. It will be a hybrid course with online lectures and
the use of clinical case studies in an active learning environment. The students will acquire a rigorous foundation for
application of cell biology and physiology principles to other course selections in the Post-Bac program which will be critical
to the student's performance in the first and second years of medical school. A firm foundation in the basic science of health
and disease processes at the cellular level including regenerative medicine will ensure that the student is able to apply these
principles to their clinical performance as medical students and as practicing physicians. This course will also serve as a
valuable resource for students interested in pursuing a career in biomedical sciences. : Medical Biochemistry, a clinical
approach PMED 01.310 and Admission to Advanced Premedical Studies Post-baccalaureate Program at Cooper Medical
School of Rowan University) Course Description: This course involves the study of the individual eukaryotic cell and tissues
and will begin with an introduction to cell theory. Topics that will be discussed are: the structure and functions of the
plasma membrane, nucleus, mitochondria, lysosomes, endoplasmic reticulum and the golgi apparatus. The course will then
progress to provide the student with a strong understanding of the fundamental concepts of regenerative medicine and stem
cell biology and their potential to alter current medical treatment. It will be a hybrid course with online lectures and the use
of clinical case studies in an active learning environment. The students will acquire a rigorous foundation for application of
cell biology and physiology principles to other course selections in the Post-Bac program which will be critical to the
student's performance in the first and second years of medical school. A firm foundation in the basic science of health and
disease processes at the cellular level including regenerative medicine will ensure that the student is able to apply these
principles to their clinical performance as medical students and as practicing physicians. This course will also serve as a
valuable resource for students interested in pursuing a career in biomedical sciences.

END

PMED 01410:

Medical Genetics

Prerequisites: PMED 01.310Admission to Advanced Premedical Studies Post-Baccalaureate Program at Cooper Medical School of Rowan University

Over the last several years, there has been a massive increase in our understanding of the human
genome and the implication of genetic changes as they relate to not only genetic disorders but also to cancer and even our
responses to pharmacological agents. These advances have ushered in a new age of personalized medicine where it is no
longer good enough to diagnose a patient's disorder, but it is now sometimes necessary to identify the nuances of a patient's
genetic make-up using molecular diagnostic techniques in order to better tailor therapy. Because medical genetics and
molecular diagnostics are quickly becoming an essential part of medical care in many medical fields, it is imperative that
students who wish to pursue careers in the biomedical sciences also receive an adequate familiarity with these fields. This
course is designed to provide an overview of human genetic concepts and clinical disorders that have a genetic component
and will be a hybrid course with online lectures and the use of clinical case studies in an active learning environment. After
completing this course, students will have an understanding of the general principles of human genetics and its relevance to
modern clinical medicine.

END

PMED 01420:

Human Physiology

Prerequisites: Medical Biochemistry, a clinical approach PMED 01.310 and Admission to Advanced Premedical Studies Post-Baccalaureate Program at Cooper Medical School of Rowan University

This course will provide a comprehensive overview of human physiology at the molecular, cellular and systems levels. The
curriculum will begin with studies of basic cell physiology and extend through complete organ systems. Topics will include
basic membrane biology, muscle contraction, cardiovascular, respiratory, renal, gastrointestinal, endocrine, and peripheral
nervous systems. The activities of these organ systems are highly integrated and coordinated activity is essential for
maintaining a constant physiological environment. Homeostatic mechanisms that regulate these multi organs systems and
compensate for perturbations of baseline physiology will be discussed. An important component of this curriculum will be
to describe the physiology changes encountered in routine clinical medicine and disease states. Therapeutic treatment
options for conditions will be discussed. This curriculum is designed to meet the needs of students interested in pursuing a
career in medicine or the biomedical sciences.

END

PMED 01430:

Medical Microbiology

Prerequisites: Medical Biochemistry, a clinical approach PMED 01.310 and Admission to Advanced Premedical Studies Post-Bac Program at Cooper Medical School of Rowan University

This course introduces basic concepts of general microbiology and host-microbe interactions. The course will
begin with a discussion of the structure, metabolism, genetics, growth and control of bacteria and fungi; the structure and
mechanisms of replication of bacteriophages and animal viruses; the mechanism of defenses of vertebrates against infectious
diseases; the mechanism of transmission of microbes; the strategies for detection of microbes and viruses in clinical
specimens; the mechanism of action of antibiotics and antiviral and current and experimental vaccines against infectious
diseases. It will be a hybrid course with online lectures and it will use clinical case studies in an active learning environment
to increase student's critical thinking skills in medical microbiology. Upon completion of this course the students will have a
comprehensive overview and high level of understanding of the diversity of human pathogens, the different types of
diagnosis available, their different mechanisms inducing pathogenesis, epidemiology and therapeutic and prevention
strategies against infectious diseases.

END

PMED 01440:

Mechanisms of Disease

Prerequisites: Admission to the Advanced Premedical Studies Post-Baccalaureate Program and PMED 01310

Pathology literally translated means the "study of suffering", but in commonplace usage
refers to the study of diseases affecting the human body. As such, mechanisms of Disease will be a natural continuation of
previous courses and will focus on basic pathophysiologic processes that underlie human disease. The course will begin with
a discussion of adaptive cellular responses to stress and progress to cell injury and cell death. Specific disease mechanisms or
processes that will be considered include: tissue inflammatory and repair responses, immune dysfunction, neoplasia,
developmental and genetic disorders, hemodynamic derangements, and environmental and nutritional pathology. The
course will provide the student with an understanding of basic disease mechanisms that will enhance their performance in
the first and second years of medical school. A firm foundation general Pathology is essential for medical students and
practicing physicians. The course will utilize a hybrid model with online lectures and the use of clinical case studies in an
active learning environment. Upon completion of the course, it is expected that students will have developed a foundation
that can then be further advanced and applied to specific diseases involving the various organ system of the body.

END

CHE 06502:

Special Topics in Chemical Engineering

This course presents chemical engineering topics related to recent developments in industrial practice or research. May be
repeated.

END

CHE 06506:

Process Heat Transfer

Application of heat transfer to the process industries. Mechanisms of heat transfer; conduction, convection and radiation;
Selection and design of heat exchanging equipment, e.g., double-pipe, shell and tube, plate and frame, extended fin heat
exchangers. Design parameters for heat transfer with phase change.

END

CHE 06508:

Membrane Process Technology

Principles of membrane processes: reverse osmosis, ultrafiltration, microfiltration, electrodialysis, pervaporation, gas
permeation, and their application to traditional and emerging fields. Membrane materials and structure. Mass transfer and
design aspects for both liquid and gas separation systems.

END

CHE 06510:

Biochemical Engineering

The fundamentals and engineering of bioprocess engineering with emphasis on applying biotechnology to industrial
processes. Essential aspects of biochemistry, microbiology and kinetics. Discussion of bioreactor engineering, and recovery
and purification processes. Processing applications of engineering kinetics and enzyme technology. Laboratory experiments
and demonstrations will be integrated throughout the course.

END

CHE 06512:

Safety in the Process Industries

This course presents the basic principles, guidelines, and calculations necessary for the safe design and operation of
chemical plants and related manufacturing facilities. Topics include: toxics and human exposure, fires and explosions, vessel
relief systems, hazard identification and risk assessment, source and dispersion models. Accident investigation is discussed
along with a review of actual case histories.

END

CHE 06514:

Transport Phenomena for Engineers

This course will present the analogies among heat, mass, and momentum transfer. Governing differential equations and
their uses in steady-state and unsteady-state systems will be described. Applications will be discussed for mass transfer
coupled with heat transfer and/or chemical reaction. Numerical methods and computer applications will be integrated
throughout the course.

END

CHE 06515:

Advanced Reactor Design

Overview of chemical reaction types and ideal reactors. Catalysis and catalytic reactors; analogies for real reactors; fluid
flow and heat and mass transfer effects on chemical reactions and reactor design; numerical analyses and simulation of
reacting systems; applications in the chemical industry.

END

CHE 06516:

Advanced Separation Process Technology

This course describes advanced separation processes such as: crystallization and precipitation; adsorption, chromatography
and ion exchange; reverse osmosis, ultrafiltration, gas permeation and pervaporation. Commercial system design parameters
and laboratory demonstrations will be included. An overview of other novel separation processes will be done.

END

CHE 06518:

Polymer Engineering

This course provides an introduction to the various aspects of polymer engineering starting with basic polymer properties,
structure and function. The major topics covered are the formation of polymer systems and manufacturing techniques.
Fabrication processes topics include coating, extrusion and foams. The production of thin-films and membranes will focus
on stretching, phase inversion, and hollow fiber spinning. Students will study application of polymeric materials engineering
to various industries.

END

CHE 06520:

Green Engineering Design in the Chemical Industry

This course evaluates process design techniques to minimize waste and by-products in the processing and manufacturing
industries. Topics include: mass and heat recycling processes; technologies for process steam renovation, material reuse and
recycling methods. Case studies of industrial applications are utilized.

END

CHE 06528:

Fluid Flow Applications in Processing and Manufacturing

This course will cover the foundation principles of applied fluid mechanics with an emphasis on industrial applications.
Topics in mixing, multi-phase fluid flow and processing, and fluidization will be covered. Key technologies from chemical,
civil, and mechanical engineering applications will be used to illustrate concepts. The course will provide a strong
background in the application of fluid mechanics principles to industrial processing and manufacturing operations.

END

CHE 06530:

Experimental Methods in Chemical Engineering

Prerequisites: Graduate Standing & Approval of Graduate Advisor

Hands-on experience with experimental techniques and computer aided methods for materials characterization and
solutions to contemporary research problems in Chemical Engineering as well as in a variety of other engineering disciplines.
Modular course including experimentations such as, but not limited to, TGA, DSC, DMA, and Rheology and
computer-aided software packages such as ASPEN, GAMS, COMSOL, MATLAB and ImageJ.

END

CHE 06568:

Electrochemical Engineering

This course will focus on the fundamental principles of process electrochemistry. Basic principles of thermodynamics,
kinetics and mass transfer as applied to electrochemical systems will be presented. Modeling of electrochemical systems and
application of electrochemical principles to corroding systems will be conducted by the students. Engineering case studies
of commercial applications in energy conversion and storage and electrolytic processes will be presented.

END

CHE 06570:

Air Pollution Control

This course introduces students to air pollution control theory. Students design air pollution control processes and specify
equipment related to the control of particulate, gaseous, and toxic air emissions. The chemistry required for pollution
control process design is presented. The environmental impacts due both to controlling and not controlling emissions are
considered. Students design control equipment, specify and troubleshoot control systems and predict the impacts for each
major type of control system.

END

CHE 06571:

Biomedical Control Systems

Prerequisites: Graduate standing and approval of Graduate Advisor

This course is an extension of Process Dynamics and Control focusing on the identification and study of biomedical
control systems. Students will learn to identify components of physiological control systems and examine the origin of
diseases at a systems level. Additional topics include the incorporation of artificial organs into existing physiological control
systems, mathematical modeling of biological processes, designing therapeutic strategies, and integrating the results of
primary literature into quantitative explanations of diseases.

END

CHE 06572:

Biomedical Process Engineering

This course introduces students to applications of chemical engineering fundamentals to biomedical systems. Students
analyze and design biomedical processes. The basic biochemistry and physiology required for understanding of biomedical
systems are presented. Advanced principles of mass transfer, heat transfer, fluid flow and chemical reaction are used to
analyze or design drug delivery systems, pharmacokinetic models, the circulatory system, transport across cell membranes,
and human and artificial organs. Laboratory experiments and demonstrations will be integrated throughout the course.

END

CHE 06573:

Biomaterials Engineering

The goal of studying biomaterials is to understand how the body's natural tissues are organized on a compositional,
structural, and properties basis. We also seek to understand how the body recognizes and responds to foreign materials, and
combine this knowledge in order to successfully design implants that can be used to treat debilitating diseases. The graduate
level course emphasizes research literature, including landmark papers and emerging topics, and also includes additional
advanced topics in biomaterial design.

END

CHE 06574:

Advances in Particle Technology

This course introduces students to application of chemical engineering fundamentals in the particle processing industry.
Processes involving particles are an important part of the chemical process industry. These processes range from fluidized
catalytic cracking of oils to coating processes in the pharmaceutical industry. Students will use advanced principles in fluid
flow, heat and mass transport, and kinetics to analyze and design particle manufacturing processes and chemical industry
processes involving particles. Novel processes will also be discussed and analyzed.

END

CHE 06575:

Biopharmaceutical and Industrial Fluid Mixing

Prerequisites: Graduate standing and approval of Graduate Advisor

Students in this course will demonstrate the importance mixing of both in biotechnology and the pahrmaceutical
industries. The design project in this class will include a product that requires multiple process steps involving multiple
phases and complex liquids and chemical reactions. Students will apply single and multi-phase fluid dynamics to the design
of an industrial process that includes equipment design. A major objective of the class is to develop equipment designs for
the biotechnology and pharmaceutical industry.

END

CHE 06576:

Bioseparation Processes

This course will focus on the fundamental principles of bioseparation processes. The characteristics of bioseparations will
be presented as applied to downstream processing in the pharmaceutical/biotechnology and related industries. Theory and
design of filtration, microfiltration, centrifugation, cell disruption, extraction, adsorption, chromatography, precipitation,
ultrafiltration, crystallization, and drying will be presented as applied to biosystems. Commercial design considerations,
such as sanitary design/sterilization, water quality, solvent recovery, waste disposal and biosafety, will be reviewed.

END

CHE 06577:

Advanced Engineering Process Analysis and Experimental Design

This course exposes students to advanced engineering applications of process analysis and experimental design. The course
includes a multidisciplinary approach with theoretical background to support the course applications. Students will use
advanced statistical and optimization techniques for process analysis and experimental design, process monitoring and
quality control presently used in industry. The analysis and experimental design techniques presented in this course serve to
optimize complex industrially relevant processes and make engineering design and calculations more effective. Applications
from a wide range of industries will be presented including pharmaceutical, food, bulk and specialty chemicals, and
petroleum industry applications.

END

CHE 06578:

Tissue Engineering

Prerequisites: Graduate standing and approval of Graduate Advisor

Tissue engineering is an expanding field that integrates principles of biology and engineering for the development of tissue
substitutes and artificial organs. This course, which utilizes a combined lecture-laboratory approach, will review embryology,
cell culture techniques, stem cell biology, cell signaling, cell development and differentiation, biocompatibility, tissue
organization and function, biomaterial synthesis/characterization, and structure-function relationships in tissue engineering
scaffolds.

END

CHE 06579:

Industrial Process Pathways

This course will study chemical reaction mechanisms that play crucial roles in the chemical industry. Fundamentals of
reaction thermochemistry and reaction kinetics will be discussed. Students will learn to construct mechanistic models of
complex, multi-reaction systems, and to apply these models to the solution of practical problems such as yield optimization.

END

CHE 06580:

Optimization of Engineering Projects

This course will overview strategies for planning and directing long-term engineering projects. Topics will include project
organization, project scheduling, allocation of resources, project optimization and financial analyses.

END

CHE 06581:

Advanced Process Analysis

This course will examine advanced topics in process analysis including: process consistency, identification of optimal
process based on economic analysis, process documentation including flowsheets and budgets, replacement analysis for
processing equipment, and rationing limited resources between competing projects.

END

CHE 06582:

Food Engineering Systems

This course introduces students to the application of fundamental and advanced chemical engineering fundamentals
applied to food processing systems. Students analyze and design food engineering processes. The basic and advanced
chemistry and biochemistry required for an in-depth understanding of food systems is presented. Basic principles of mass
transfer, heat transfer, fluid flow, chemical reaction, process control, and mixing are used to analyze or design food
production systems. Computer simulations will be used for the design of food processing systems. Laboratory experiments
and demonstrations will be integrated throughout the course.

END

CHE 06584:

Controlled Release Theory, Technology And Applications

Controlled release systems are designed to provide delivery of an agent at a pre-determined rate for an extended period of
time. Controlled release offers several advantages over traditional methods of formulation and administration: maintenance
of effective concentrations for a sustained period, less total agent required, cost effectiveness, convenience and compliance.
This course investigates controlled release technologies through the application of chemical engineering principles.
Knowledge of materials, mass transfer, heat transfer, fluid flow and chemical reactions are used to analyze and design
controlled release systems. Applications to pharmaceutical, agricultural, and food industries will be explored. Laboratory
experiments and demonstrations will be integrated throughout the course. A project will focus on the development of an
original design and fabrication for a controlled release application.

END

CHE 06585:

Engineering Quality Control

This course exposes students to the state of the art process and product control techniques. This course includes a strong
foundation in the fundamentals of engineering quality control and its relevance to process optimization. Students will learn
the theory and practical applications of control charting techniques used in industry. Process capability analysis, controller
design and control systems architecture will also be included. Students will also be exposed to experimental design and
process optimization techniques. The relevance of engineering process control in the safety and profitability of processes
and products will be emphasized. Concepts introduced throughout the course will be illustrated with practical examples
from a wide range of industries.

END

CHE 06586:

Advanced Engineering Thermodynamics.

Prerequisites: Graduate standing and approval of Graduate Advisor.

Applications of classical and molecular thermodynamics to industrial problems in chemical and phase equilibrium. Topics
include nonidea solutions, high pressure systems, complex reaction equilibria, generalized correlations, and equations of
state.

END

CHE 06587:

Process Optimization

Prerequisites: Graduate Standing and approval of Graduate Advisor

In chemical and biochemical processes, optimization is essential to determine appropriate design and operating
conditions. These systems have wide-range of complexities and requires multiple modeling methods and solution
algorithms. Thus, topics studied will include, linear optimization, nonlinear optimization (convex and nonconvex), discrete
optimization, heuristic optimization, uncertainty characterization, stochastic optimization, optimal control and
multi-objective optimization. Will include computer lab sessions to demonstrate case studies in GAMS and Matlab.

END

CHE 06588:

Advanced Process Control Automation and Design

Manufacturing facilities in the Process Industries are highly automated to meet modern efficiency, quality, safety, and
environmental goals. Students will learn to design batch and continuous processes capable of automated startup, operation
and shutdown. Quality, safety, and environmental goals will translate to discrete and continuous constraints in automated
process design. Students will learn to document process control and automation in Piping and Instrumentation Diagrams
and Functional Specifications. The challenges of operator interaction with automated systems will be featured. Students will
apply the concepts learned to a major term design project.

END

CHE 06640:

Engineering Process Analysis

This course focuses on engineering processes and introduces students to the commonalities among processes and
manufacturing platforms. Students will learn analysis techniques relevant to engineering process data and to assess data
quality, compare different types of engineering data, and develop process data models. In addition, students will be
introduced to time series analysis and multivariate analysis methods.

END

CHE 06641:

Engineering Statistical Process Control

Prerequisites: CHE 06640

This course will introduce students to the industrial tools for engineering process monitoring for safety, quality and
profitability. Students will be able to design, construct and implement control charts for a wide range of applications and
make decisions regarding the safety, quality and profitability associated with engineering processes. In addition, students
will learn the tools to assess process stability and capability. Examples from a variety of engineering processes covering a
wide range of engineering applications will be used.

END

CHE 06642:

Quality Control Methods and Metrics

Prerequisites: CHE 06641 and CHE 06640 or equivalent

This course will introduce students to industrial quality control methods and the most current techniques for process and
product continuous improvement. Students will learn how to quantitatively assess quality and design and implement a
quality audit. They will use the engineering statistical tools acquired in prerequisite courses and learn additional techniques
to analyze process quality measures. In addition, students will learn inspection, test and measurement methodologies and
acceptance sampling techniques. Examples from a variety of engineering processes covering a wide range of engineering
applications will be used.

END

CHEM 05500:

Teaching Pedagogy in Chemistry Instruction

This graduate level course focuses on pedagogy as it applies to teaching in a general chemistry and organic chemistry lab.
Topics covered in this course will include various pedagogical approaches and strategies for teaching both lab concepts and
technical skills for general and organic chemistry.

END

CHEM 05501:

Princ of Chemistry

END

CHEM 05504:

Introduction to Cannabis - A Chemistry Perspective

Prerequisites: Matriculation in graduate degree

This graduate course is an introduction to various chemistry aspects of cannabis and related compounds. Topics discussed
in this course include isolation of cannabis from natural sources, post-processing, separation, purification, and formulation,
all of which play a key role in large-scale preparation of cannabis products. While the focus will be on chemistry, this course
is designed for anyone who aspires to be a part of this growing industry or is interested in expanding their knowledge in the
field.

END

CHEM 05530:

Special Topics in Chemistry

Prerequisites: Determined by the nature of the topic.

Selected topics in individual areas of chemistry (analytical, organic, inorganic or physical). Consent of the instructor is
necessary. The requirements of this course include a graduate
laboratory project and/or research paper. This course may not be offered annually.

END

CHEM 05544:

Intro to Research

END

CHEM 05550:

Advanced Seminar

Oral presentation of scientific studies and data at the graduate level. The talks are accompanied by 35 mm slides prepared
by the student. Attendance at South Jersey American Chemical Society meetings is required. This course may not be offered
annually.

END

CHEM 06100:

Chemistry I

Prerequisites: Passing grade on Chemistry Placement Exam or C- or better in CHEM 05100

This course presents the basic principles involved in the study of chemistry. It emphasizes modern theories and laws used
in the understanding of the structures and reactions of the elements and compounds and also includes gas laws,
stoichiometry, and solution theory.

END

CHEM 06101:

Chemistry II (Lecture And Lab)

Prerequisites: CHEM 06100 or CHEM 06105

This course is a continuation of CHEM06.100. It covers these topics: equilibria, including acids and bases, complexes, and
sparingly soluble compounds, thermodynamics, kinetics, electrochemistry, and solution theory. Descriptive inorganic
chemistry is also covered.

END

CHEM 06400:

Advanced Inorganic Chemistry Lecture

Prerequisites: CHEM 06301

This course covers concepts and models of inorganic chemistry. It encompasses molecular geometries and other physical
and chemical properties on the basis of the several chemical bonding theories and with reference to the periodic table.
Students study the chemistry of both main group and d-block transition elements.

END

CHEM 06401:

Advanced Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory

Prerequisites: CHEM 06400 with concurrency allowed.

This course covers concepts and models of inorganic chemistry in the laboratory setting. Students study both main group
and transition element chemistries. The laboratory component emphasizes the synthesis and characterization of inorganic
compounds.

END

CHEM 06500:

Modern Inorganic Chemistry

This course covers concepts and models of inorganic chemistry. It encompasses molecular geometries and other physical
and chemical properties on the basis of the several chemical-bonding theories and with reference to the periodic table.
Students study the chemistry of both main group and d-block transition elements.

END

CHEM 06501:

Modern Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory

This course covers concepts and models of inorganic chemistry in the laboratory setting. Students study both main group
and transition element chemistries. The laboratory component emphasizes the synthesis and characterization of inorganic
compounds.

END

CHEM 07200:

Organic Chemistry I (Lecture And Lab)

Prerequisites: CHEM 06101 or CHEM 06106

This course studies the chemistry of carbon compounds and their properties, structures and reactions. It emphasizes the
study of the principle classes of aliphatic and aromatic compounds, which in conjunction with selected experiments, gives an
understanding of the mechanisms of organic reactions. Required for science majors.

END

CHEM 07201:

Organic Chemistry II (Lecture And Lab)

Prerequisites: CHEM 07200

This course is a continuation of CHEM07.200. Required for science majors.

END

CHEM 07348:

Biochemistry (Lecture And Lab)

Prerequisites: (CHEM 07201 OR CHEM 07202 OR CHEM 07203) AND (MCB 01102 OR BIOL 01202 OR BIOL 01203)

This course deals with chemical compounds and reactions important to the functioning of biological systems and includes
a discussion of the metabolic pathways for energy production and biosynthesis.

END

CHEM 07512:

Antibiotics

Prerequisites: Matriculation in MS Pharmaceutical Sciences o Permission of Instructor

Antibiotics are broadly defined as agents that arrest or kill bacteria and serve a central role in modern medicine. Chemical
compounds that exhibit antibiotic activity are wide ranging in chemical composition and biochemical mechanism of action.
This course will provide an overview of this important class of biologically active molecules.

END

CHEM 07531:

Special Topics in Biochemistry

This course covers special topics in individual areas of biochemistry. Specific prerequisites are determined by the nature of
the course when it is announced.

END

CHEM 07548:

Biochemistry

This course is concerned about Chemical compounds and chemical reactions which are of paramount importance to the
functioning of biochemical systems. The major metabolic pathways for energy production and biosynthesis are examined.
Laboratory experiments reinforce and expand the lecture material. The requirements of this course include a graduate
laboratory project and/or research paper. Admission to the course will be at the discretion of the Graduate Advisor. This
course is taught in the Chemistry and Biochemistry Department.

END

CHEM 07557:

Chemical Biology

The goal of this course is to describe how chemistry is applied to biochemical and biological systems to answer specific
questions. It examines the use of small, synthetic molecules that are used as probes of biochemical function as well as how to
design experiments using these molecules. The course also encompasses the use of purely synthetic compounds as functional
or structural mimics of biological molecules. The methods and techniques used to measure designed interactions will also be
discussed.

END

CHEM 07558:

Advanced Biochemistry

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of Instructor

This course provides an in-depth study of the principles involved in biological processes. It emphasizes the significance of
biochemical reactions and regulations as well as mechanisms. A thorough elucidation of structure, function and mechanism
will be presented. The overall strategy of living systems will be illustrated. Laboratory experiments will provide exposure to
representative procedures and some important modern techniques. Students are encouraged to design their own molecular
biology experiments using the facilities provided. A term project is incorporated into this course. Students are required to
conduct an in-depth review of the literature regarding a topic.

END

CHEM 07560:

Advanced Biochemistry Lecture

This lecture course deals with complex biochemical processes involving the interaction of numerous classes of
biomolecules. Specifically the course focuses on the interplay of proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids in the
cellular response and adaptation to the environment, both locally in the cell and of the organism as a whole. The course
relies on both traditional descriptions of biochemical processes and the inclusion of primary literature sources to analyze
experimental data, explain methodology, and introduce cutting edge concepts.

END

CHEM 07561:

Advanced Biochemistry Laboratory

Prerequisites: CHEM 07560 (may be taken concurrently)

This laboratory course deals with isolation and characterization of molecules from biochemical systems. The fundamentals
and applications of chromatographic, electrophoretic, and spectroscopy techniques applied to biological molecules are
taught through laboratory projects.

END

CHEM 07564:

Advanced Organic Synthesis

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

This course will provide and in-depth overview of several synthetically useful chemical methodologies, reagents, and
reactions that are essential in synthesis of organic pharmaceuticals. Some of the general categories of reactions to be
discussed in this course include reduction, oxidation, protecting groups, and carbon-carbon bond forming reactions. This
course will survey a broad and diverse range of enantioselective, diastereoselective, chemoselective, and/or regioselective
chemical transformations critical for the preparation of medicinal compounds. This course would suit the needs of graduate
and senior undergraduate students who intend to pursue careers in the field of pharmaceutical sciences.

END

CHEM 07565:

Organic Reactions And Mechanisms

An advanced presentation of the major classes of organic chemical reactions, with the major emphasis being placed upon
the detailed mechanisms of such reactions. Modern organic theory is included. The requirements of this course include a
research paper or individual project. Admission to the course will be at the discretion of the graduate adviser. This course
may not be offered annually.

END

CHEM 07567:

Advanced Organic Preparations (Lecture & Lab)

This is a laboratory course that provides an in-depth study of the procedures and key organic transformations that can be
applied to the pharmaceutical and fine chemical industry. Major topics of discussion include the preparation of densely
functionalized organic compounds that are used as pharmaceutical scaffolds.

END

CHEM 07568:

Medicinal Chemistry

This course describes various topics related to the biochemical principles and metabolic pathways with particular emphasis
on pharmaceutical applications and biotechnology. This course will focus on the molecular mechanisms of drug action and
chemical basis for drug therapy. Current methods used to study medicinal chemistry including recombinant DNA,
combinatorial chemistry and bioinformatics, will be reviewed. A 3-D molecular modeling of drug targets and drug design will
be integrated throughout the course. Clinical trials of drug case study are included. A term project is incorporated into this
course. Students are required to conduct an in-depth review of the literature regarding a topic.

END

CHEM 07570:

Organic Spectroscopy

This is a laboratory course with class discussion on the separation and identification of organic compounds. Both classical
and instrumental techniques are used in compound structure determination. Lecture emphasis is placed on interpreting IR,
NMR, and mass spectra. The requirements of this course include a graduate laboratory project and/or research paper.
Admission to the course will be at the discretion of the graduate adviser. This course may not be offered annually.

END

CHEM 07572:

Advanced Organometallic Chemistry

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

This course covers the chemistry of organometallic compounds and their applications in organic synthesis, and
pharmaceutical industry. Some of the topics discussed in this course include the study of physical and chemical properties,
characterization, analysis, and preparation of organometallic compounds, along with advanced organometallic reaction
mechanisms such as substitution, addition, elimination, and insertion, etc. The course is designed for pharmaceutical
sciences students and includes submission of a written report on original research literature in organometallic chemistry.

END

CHEM 07575:

Polymer Chemistry

This course presents a comprehensive overview of polymer chemistry. The subject matter, by its nature, crosses multiple
specializations within the field of chemistry. The structure, properties and synthesis of polymeric materials are covered in
accordance with the recommendations of the joint polymer education committee of the American Chemical Society.

END

CHEM 07588:

Advanced Natural Products Chemistry

This course is an introduction to the various aspects of chemistry that contribute to the extraction, isolation, analysis, and
biochemical effects of natural products. This course will focus on pharmaceutical, biotechnological, and medicinal
applications of these molecules with a special emphasis on cannabinoids.

END

CHEM 07590:

General Aspects of Pharmacology

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

This course attempts to provide an understanding of the basic principles and mechanism in pharmacology. Some of the
topics discussed include pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of drugs, and their interactions with the living tissues. It
also provides a fundamental knowledge about the mechanism of action, structure-activity relationships, and interaction of
therapeutics with physiological system and metabolism of drugs.

END

CHEM 07592:

Advanced Pharmaceutical Chemistry

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

This course covers the structure, properties, preparation, and analysis of organic and inorganic pharmaceutical drugs. Some
of the topics that will be discussed include pharmacognosy, organic and inorganic pharmaceuticals, solubility characteristics
and properties of these compounds under biological conditions, etc. The course is designed for pharmaceutical sciences
students and includes submissions of a written report on original research literature in pharmaceutical chemistry.

END

CHEM 07593:

Regulatory Affairs

Prerequisites: Matriculation in MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of Instructor

This course will provide an overview of the regulations associated with the commercial development of pharmaceutical
drugs or medical devices. The course would be useful for students in MS Pharmaceutical Sciences and COGS in Industrial
Chemistry.

END

CHEM 07594:

Good 
Laboratory 
Practice 
(GLP)/Good 
Manufacturing 
Practice 
(GMP)
Techniques

END

CHEM 08400:

Physical Chemistry I (Lecture)

Prerequisites: (CHEM 07201 or CHEM 07202) and (MATH 01131 or MATH 01141) and (PHYS 02201 or PHYS 00222 or PHYS
02203 or PHYS 00211 or CHE 06302 or CHEM 07203)

This course deals with the problems of the fundamental principles underlying physical chemistry. It gives major emphasis
to thermodynamics, kinetics and quantum mechanics. It also includes spectroscopy, group theory and statistical mechanics.
MATH 01230 recommended.

END

CHEM 08401:

Physical Chemistry II (Lecture)

Prerequisites: CHEM 08400

This is a continuation of CHEM 08400.

END

CHEM 08505:

Advanced Biophysical Chemistry

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

This is a graduate-level Biophysical Chemistry cousre, which focuses on applications of physical chemistry concepts and
methods to biological systems. Topics cover the basic concepts of thermodynamics, reactions kinetics and spectroscopyk,
etc. Additionally, various specific biophysical chemistry topics and experimental techniques are to be discussed. The course
will equip students with a strong theoretical background to understand advanced topics covered in other courses. Students
will be additionally required to complete an independent literature report as directed by the instructor.

END

CHEM 08510:

Advanced Survey of Molecular Modeling Methods

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

This survey course emphasizes the applications of molecular modeling theory and simulations in chemistry and
biochemistry. The course will present to students a broad and in-depth knowledge of different modeling concepts and
methodologies, and provide students opportunities to apply modern computational software to investigate molecular
structures, chemical reactions, and biomolecular processes such as enzyme catalysis and protein conformational changes,
etc. The topics will include quantum chemistry calculations, molecular mechanics, molecular dynamics simulations, in silico
drug design, etc. This course is ideal for Chemistry, Biochemistry, Bioinformatics, and Pharmaceutical Science students.

END

CHEM 09250:

Quantitative Analysis (Lecture And Lab)

Prerequisites: CHEM 06101 or CHEM 06106

This course provides lecture and laboratory experience in classical methods of gravimetric and volumetric analyses as well
as electrical and spectroscopic analyses.

END

CHEM 09330:

Chemical Analysis of Cannabinoids

Prerequisites: (CHEM 09249 or CHEM 09250) and (CHEM 07201 or CHEM 7202 or CHEM 7203)

This course is an introduction to the various aspects of chemical analysis that are used for the characterization of
cannabinoid content in a variety of natural and commercial products. The focus will be on extraction, spectroscopic
(including IR, UV/Vis, and mass spectrometry), and chromatographic techniques (gas chromatography, liquid
chromatography, preparative chromatography, and supercritical fluid chromatography), specifically related to their use for
cannabinoid analysis, residual solvent measurements, and pesticide detection.

END

CHEM 09500:

Advanced Clinical Chemistry

Prerequisites: Matriculation into M.S. Clinical Laboratory or COGS Clinical Laboratory Science

This graduate course focuses on the techniques and approaches to clinical chemistry. Topics covered include discussions of
instrumentation used in the analysis of clinical specimens, the handling of clinical samples, panels for analysis and quality
assessment.

END

CHEM 09502:

Quality Assurance

This graduate course focuses on the techniques and approaches to quality assurance in clinical chemistry. Topics covered
include discussions of a range of activities that enable laboratories to achieve and maintain high levels of accuracy and
proficiency despite changes in test methods and the volume of specimens tested.

END

CHEM 09510:

Instrumental Analysis

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

The theoretical basis, construction, and data interpretation of most instruments used by chemist are studied. Among the
instruments considered are visible, UV, IR, NMR, AA, fluorescence, flame emission, and mass spectrometers.
Electroanalytical, potentiometric, conductometric, electrogravimetric, and voltametric methods of analysis are used.
Laboratory experiments allow "hands-on" use of representative instruments. The requirements of this course include a
graduate laboratory project. Admission to the course will be at the discretion of the graduate adviser. This course may not be
offered annually.

END

CHEM 09520:

Advanced Supramolecular Chemistry

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

The course is about concepts, structures, functions, and applications of supramolecular molecular systems. The
supramolecular systems discussed in this course include surface assembled monolayer and multilayers, L-B films, host-guest
molecular recognition systems, liquid crystals, and nanoclusters. Application of supramolecular chemistry includes clinic
diagnostics, drug design and drug delivery, biomimic, and nanofabrication.

END

CHEM 09522:

Advanced Bioanalytical Chemistry

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

This course will focus on the details of analysis of biomolecules using a variety of analytical techniques including liquid
chromatography, electrophoresis and capillary electrophoresis. A thorough discussion of mass spectometry technique, as
applied to biomolecules, will be conducted. This course will also introduce students to different DNA analysis techniques
and electrochemical biosensors in biology and medicine. This also includes the analytical centrifugation methods as used in
determination of molecular weight of biomolecules. This course prepares students for graduate school, careers in pharmacy,medical, and forensic among others.

END

CHEM 09530:

Advanced Chemical Analysis of Cannabinoids

This course is an introduction to the various aspects of chemical analysis that are used for the characterization of
cannabinoid content in a variety of natural and commercial products. The focus will be on extraction, spectroscopic
(including IR, UV/Vis, and mass spectrometry), and chromatographic techniques (gas chromatography, liquid
chromatography, preparative chromatography, and supercritical fluid chromatography), specifically related to their use for
cannabinoid analysis, residual solvent measurements, and pesticide detection.

END

CHEM 09592:

Pharmaceutical Techniques I

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

This course is intended to provide dedicated training for students in the design of research projects and their
implementation in a laboratory setting. The course will offer students the opportunity to focus on the preliminary aspects of
research design and implementation in one or more sub-disciplines of chemistry relating to the pharmaceutical sciences.
Students will be expected to (a) retrieve, understand and evaluate prior contributions in the identified area of study and (b)
design and implement hypoyjesis-driven studies within this area of study.

END

CHEM 09593:

Pharmaceutical Techniques II

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

This course is intended to provide dedicated training for students in the chemical, biochemical and computational analysis
of the chemical entities with relevance to the pharmaceutical sciences via spectroscopic and other characterization
techniques. The course will offer students the opportunity to focus on the preliminary aspects of research design and
implementation in one or more sub-disciplines of chemistry relating to the pharmaceutical sciences. Students will be
expected to (a) understand, evaluate and discuss scientific information from the primary literature and (b) design and
implement research or computational experiments and (c) analyze project outcomes and research data.

END

CHEM 09594:

Pharmaceutical Techniques III

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

This course is intended to provide dedicated training for students in the development of professional, environmental and
ethical best practices in the context of pharmaceutical research. The course will offer students the opportunity to focus on
managing professional, environmental and ethical challenges in one or more sub-disciplines of chemistry relating to the
pharmaceutical sciences. Students will be expected to retrieve, understand and evaluate prior examples of professional,
environmental and/or ethical challenges the indentified area of study.

END

CHEM 09596:

MS Thesis Research I

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MS Pharmaceutical Sciences or COGS in Industrial Chemistry or Permission of the Instructor

This course provides individual laboratory research exploration of a topic beyond the scope of the existing courses. The
research performed would be instructor/advisor specific and is based on the current research being performed in the
department. The students would be expected to (a) conduct basic and applied research in pharmaceutical sciences, (b)
retrieve and review research literature, (c) provide periodic updates and project reports, and (d) write manuscripts for
publication in scientific journals or presentations at conferences and meetings.

END

CHEM 09597:

MS Thesis Research II

Prerequisites: CHEM 09596

This is a continuation course for MS Thesis Research I. The students in this course would either expand upon existing
research projects from their earlier course, or start newer research projects, which will be determined on an individual case
by case basis. The students would be expected to (a) conduct basic and applied research in pharmaceutical sciences, (b)
retrieve and review research literature, (c) provide periodic updates and scientific project reports, and (d) write manuscripts
for publication in journals or scientific presentations at conferences and meeetings.

END

CHEM 09598:

MS Thesis Research III

Prerequisites: CHEM 09597

This is a continuation course for MS Thesis Research II. The students in this course would either expand upon existing
research projects from their earlier course, or start newer research projects, which will be determined on an individual case
by case basis. The students would be expected to (a) conduct basic and applied research in pharmaceutical sciences, (b)
retrieve and review research literature, (c) provide periodic updates and scientific project reports, and (d) write manuscripts
for publication in journals or scientific presentations at conferences and meetings.

END

CHEM 09599:

MS Thesis Research IV

Prerequisites: CHEM 09598

This is a continuation course for MS Thesis Research III. The students in this course would either expand upon existing
research projects from their earlier course, or start newer research projects, which will be determined on an individual case
by case basis. The students would be expected to (a) conduct basic and applied research in pharmaceutical sciences, (b)
retrieve and review research literature, (c) provide periodic updates and scientific project reports, and (d) write manuscripts
for publication in journals or scientific presentations at conferences and meetings.

END

CHEM 09600:

MS Thesis Research V

Prerequisites: CHEM 09599. Permission of instructor required.

This is a continuation course for MS Thesis Research IV. The students in this course would either expand upon existing
research projects from their earlier course, or start newer research projects, which will be determined on an individual case
by case basis. The students would be expected to (a) conduct basic and applied research in pharmaceutical sciences, (b)
retrieve, and review research literature, (c) provide periodic updates and scientific project reports, and (d) write manuscripts
for publication in journals or scientific presentations at conferences and meetings.

END

CHEM 09601:

PhD Dissertation Research

Prerequisites: Matriculation into the PhD Pharmaceutical Chemistry program

The PhD dissertation highlights the innovative research contributions from a doctoral student to the field of
pharmaceutical chemistry. The students would be expected to (a) conduct basic and applied research in the field, (b)
retrieve, and review research literature, (c) provide periodic updates and project reports, and (d) write manuscripts for
publication in scientific journals or presentations at conferences and meetings. This is a long-term process that requires
significant time and effort from the student. PhD Dissertation Research is a research course designed to provide necessary
time and guidance for the student to work on cutting edge research towards the Ph.D. degree. This course can and will be
taken multiple times over the duration of the program.

END

CHEM 09602:

Graduate Seminar

Prerequisites: Matriculation into the PhD Pharmaceutical Chemistry program

Graduate seminar is a required course for the PhD Pharmaceutical Chemistry students. In this course students give oral
reports on topics chosen from the current chemical literature. Students are required to attend local professional meetings as
well as the departmental seminars and colloquia to improve their theoretical background.

END

INTR 01510:

Master's Thesis Continuation

Prerequisites: CHEM 09596

Continuation of supervised research leading to a master’s thesis

END

INTR 01700:

PhD Dissertation Research Continuation

Permission from the graduate program and cognizant College Dean.

Continuation of supervised research leading to a doctoral dissertation beyond the required research credits required for
the program. Requires permission from the graduate program and cognizant College Dean. This course can and will be
taken multiple times over the duration of the program.

END

INTR 06502:

Responsible Conduct, Rigor, and Reproducibility in Science

This graduate level course focuses on providing students with an overview of critical considerations and concepts relating
to nature of science (NOS), responsible conduct of research (RCR), rigor & reproducibility, scientific citizenship, the
scientific enterprise and ethical and philosophical issues in the applied sciences.

END

CEE 08503:

Special Topics Civil Engineering

Civil engineering topics related to recent developments in industrial practice or engineering research. May be repeated.

END

CEE 08504:

Engineering Estimating

The course deals with the development of engineering estimates for civil engineering projects and project components
including labor, materials and equipment. Total project costs including direct and indirect costs, field and home-office costs,
and contingency are covered. Also covered are the various types of civil engineering estimates including piles and
cofferdams, wellpoints and earthdrilling, water and sewer systems, road and highway pavements, concrete buildings and
bridges, and steel buildings and bridges. The course includes appropriate computer applications.

END

CEE 08507:

Prestressed Concrete

END

CEE 08512:

Advanced Environmental Treatment Process Principles

Topics in Fundamentals of Physicochemical Processes in Environmental Engineering such as Adsorption,
Coagulation/Flocculation, Filtration, Sedimentation, Disinfection, Ion Exchange, Chemical Oxidation, Corrosion and
Membranes.

END

CEE 08513:

Environmental Management

This course deals with integrated environmental management issues and methodologies with a global perspective. Topics
include environmental decision-making from a socio-economic and environmental standpoint, environmental data
collection, analysis, and management techniques for environmental assessment and feasibility case studies. The course is
intended to give students an understanding of current environmental issues and tools for analysis of data for environmental
management. The issues are examined from the worldwide perspectives of science, engineering, business and society. The
course will culminate in an original research project and presentation.

END

CEE 08522:

Site Remediation Engineering

Topics in site remediation engineering, including site characterization, site safety, modeling site conditions, conducting
feasibility studies, and designing remediation systems, such as pump and treat, stabilization, containment, treatment walls,
natural attenuation, enhanced bioremediation, phytoremediation, oxidation, soil flushing, and soil vapor extraction.

END

CEE 08531:

Solid and Hazardous Waste Management

The course deals with solid and hazardous waste sources, regulations and management; engineering principles, treatment
and disposal methods; design of landfills; recycling; toxicology principles; and risk assessment. The course includes
appropriate laboratory experiments and computer applications.

END

CEE 08532:

Pollutant Fate and Transport

Topics include Characteristics and Properties of Organic Pollutants, Aquatic Chemistry, Transport Mechanisms for
Pollutants (Adsorption, Retardation, Attenuation, Volatilization, Biodegradation), Groundwater (Properties, Flow
Equations, Transport in Porous Media) and Mathematical Modeling.

END

CEE 08533:

Integrated Solid Waste Management

The course deals with the theories and principles of integrated solid waste management as applied to real-world analysis
and design problems. The course covers the design of facilities and programs, such as landfills, composting facilities, transfer
stations, collection programs, and drop-off centers, and planning of integrated systems for municipalities and counties.
Computer applications are included.

END

CEE 08538:

Advanced Biological Treatment Processes for Engineers

This engineering course will allow students to apply engineering concepts and techniques for the characterization and
design of mathematical modeling of human impacts on microbial systems and vice versa. Special consideration will be given
to microbe-mediated cycling of organic materials (i.e., pollutants) in natural and engineered systems, including: conventional
water and wastewater treatment, municipal landfills, pristine and contaminated groundwater and surface waters, etc.

END

CEE 08541:

Advanced Surface Hydrology

This course is to increase knowledge on the application of advanced hydrologic methods to water resources problems.
Specifics include the use of probabilistic techniques to characterize hydrologic processes. Such analyses are characterized by
data collection, analysis and interpretation, simulation, and forecasting. The level of understanding should, upon completion
of the course, be sufficient to understand and appreciate the important issues in the current literature where statistical and
optimization methods are used in prediction and interpretation of hydrologic processes. Synergy between hydrological
processes and environmental quality, hydrometeorology, global warming, informatics, and ecology and conservation will be
discussed.

END

CEE 08542:

Advanced Hydrometerology

This course introduces advanced topics in hydrometeorology to the students and latest technologies used by water
resources engineers for understanding, modeling and simulating the global water issues. This course will investigate the
relationship between hydrology and meteorology and focus on key processes including precipitation, stream and ground
water flow, flooding, water chemistry and contamination, and water resource management. A large component of the course
will include collecting and analyzing data, estimating stream flow, and using spreadsheet and graphic programs to monitor
water levels following precipitation events. Students in the class will use state of the art software to analyze the collected
datasets. Topics included in this course are intended for students engaged in environmental and water resources
engineering. The course is designed for students that are familiar with key concepts from courses in mathematics,
hydrology, and water monitoring.

END

CEE 08543:

Advanced Water Resources Engineering

This course covers advanced topics in water resources engineering including the analysis and design of advanced hydraulic
structures, hydraulic similitude and modeling, wave action, and advanced hydrology.

END

CEE 08544:

Hydraulic Design

The course focuses on the design and analysis of structures for controlling and conveying water in both the built and
natural environment. Topics covered vary from year to year based upon instructor and student interests. Past topics have
included open channel flow design, dams and spillways, sanitary and storm sewers, culverts, pumping stations,
turbomachinery, and hydraulic similitude and modeling.

END

CEE 08545:

Water and Environmental Monitoring

The course focuses on the engineering study of fluid flow in the environment. Advanced topics in water resources
engineering are explored, with content varying based upon instructor and student interests. Past topics have included open
channel flow, hydrology, fish passage at hydraulic structures, sediment transport, mixing in natural water bodies, and water
quality modeling.

END

CEE 08546:

River Engineering

This course presents the theory and analytical techniques for the design and analysis of engineering projects that control or
convey water in open channel systems. Topics include sediment transport, design of hydraulic structures, river restoration,
and computer modeling. The course will culminate in an original research project and presentation.

END

CEE 08547:

Watershed Engineering

This course presents the theory and analytical techniques for the design and analysis of stormwater management projects.
Topics include environmental law, stormwater mitigation structures, rainfall-runoff analysis, limnology, and computer
modeling. The course will culminate in an original research project and presentation.

END

CEE 08548:

Water and Environmental Monitoring

Prerequisites: Graduate Standing or Instructor Permission

Introduces the latest and techniques used by water resources and environmental engineers for mapping, modeling and
monitoring. The applied goal of this class is to develope an understanding of water and environmental spaces and how maps
represent them. This course will provide an overrview of the application of advance geographic information system, remote
sensing and complex mapping in water ressources and environmental engineering. Students will use satellite images to
extract data and produce viable information. Students will become familiar with state of the art software in romoet sensing
and mapping.

END

CEE 08552:

Foundation Engineering

The fundamental theme of the course is the analysis and design of structural building and bridge foundations based on
advanced principles of soil mechanics. These advanced principles of soil mechanics include compressibility, shear strength,
and bearing capacity. The types of foundations analyzed and designed include spread footings and pile foundations. The
course includes appropriate computer applications.

END

CEE 08553:

Earth Retaining Systems

The fundamental theme of the course is earth retaining systems including advanced principles of soil mechanics and
analysis and design of earth retaining systems. The advanced principles of soil mechanics include lateral soil pressure and
slope stability. The analysis and design of earth retaining systems includes slopes, embankments, retaining walls and other
systems. The course includes appropriate laboratory experiments and computer applications.

END

CEE 08554:

Design of Geosynthetic Systems

The fundamental theme of this course is the engineering study of the types and methods used in the geosynthetics for
geotechnical applications. These include understanding of the types and applications of geosynthetics, field construction of
geosynthetic systems, and design methods for geotextiles, geogrids, geomembranes, and geocomposites. The graduate
course will have a significant design component, which is not there in the undergraduate course.

END

CEE 08562:

Advanced Transportation Engineering

The fundamental theme of the course is the study of advanced topics in transportation engineering including advanced
highway engineering and advanced mass transit systems. These advanced topics include the impact and interaction of
sociological, economic, geographic and environmental factors on transportation systems. The course includes appropriate
field measurements and computer applications.

END

CEE 08564:

Advanced Design of Elements of Transportation Engineering

The fundamental theme of the course is the study of advanced topics in highway design and analysis, signalized and
un-signalized intersection design, forecast travel demand modeling and transportation planning. Topics covered vary from
year to year based upon instructor and student interests. This course also includes field measurements and computer
applications.

END

CEE 08565:

Advanced Pavement Analysis and Evaluation

Prerequisites: CEE 08361

The fundamental theme of the course is the engineering study of pavement response. The topics covered include
non-linear behavior of pavement materials and interaction between tires and pavements. Modeling and analysis of pavement
behavior will also be taught, with content varying based upon instructor and student interests. The course includes field
experiments and computer applications.

END

CEE 08566:

Transportation Systems Modeling

Prerequisites: Graduate Standing or permission of theinstructor

Introduces latest technologies and techniques used by transportation planners and engineers to study current travel
characteristics and estimate future travel demand and supply. This course focuses on urban travel characteristics and activity
analysis, travel demand and supply analysis, transportation system and project evaluation, and program and project
implementation strategies. The course will (1) introduce concepts, procedures and methods associated with transportation
planning; (2) provide basic knowledge of travel demand forecasting models; and (3) provide basic knowledge of relevant
travel demand modeling software. The proposed course is designed for both undergraduate and graduate students who want
to develop their career in transportation engineering and planning. Students in this class will deliver research papers/reports
beyond those expected for students in CEE 08466, Introduction to Urban Transportation Planning.

END

CEE 08568:

Intelligent Transportation System

The course will focuses on systems engineering & Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) fundamentals and design of
regional ITS fundamentals. The course will introduce selected tools required to plan, design, implement and evaluate ITS
projects. Students will work on projects that require data collection, simulation and analysis using various tools. The course
is designed to investigate multidisciplinary aspects of ITS design and plan solutions for current and future transportation
system.

END

CEE 08573:

Advanced Structural Analysis

The course deals with the matrix method of structural analysis. The topics covered include structural members, member
joints, member end conditions, local and global coordinate systems, coordinate transformation, member structural matrices,
global structural matrices, condensation of global structural matrices, static structural analysis, and dynamic structural
analysis. The course will include appropriate computer applications.

END

CEE 08574:

Advanced Structural Mechanics

END

CEE 08575:

Advanced Fatigue And Fracture

This course presents the theory and analytical techniques to design structural components for cyclic loading. Topics
include linear elastic fracture mechanics; S-N fatigue; fatigue crack growth; and algorithms for simulating three-dimensional
crack propagation. The course culminates with an original research project, resulting in both oral and written reports.

END

CEE 08576:

Advanced Portland Cement Concrete

This course deals with the proportioning properties, and performance of different types of portland cement mixtures. It
covers cementitious materials, admixtures, aggregates, microstructure, strength and durability; mixture design, properties,
advanced performance testing of special types of concrete, such as high-strength, lightweight, fiber-reinforced, and
self-consolidating portland cement concretes.

END

CEE 08577:

Transportation Safety System

This course serves as an introductory course in the fundamentals and concepts of transportation safety for Civil
Engineering students. The course introduces technologies and techniques used by transportation engineers to evaluate
highway safety and develop effective safety countermeasures/strategies. Upon the completion of this course, students will: •
Understand concepts, procedures, and methods associated with the transportation safety system • Understand basic
knowledge of human factors and the fundamentals of highway safety • Apply the roadway safety management process at a
small roadway network • Use predictive methods to estimate the number of crashes for different facility types • Improve
writing and presentation skills

END

CEE 08583:

Advanced Steel Design

Prerequisites: CEE 08383

This course addresses advanced topics not covered in a first course in steel design including topics such as design of plate
girders, connections, and structural frames bracing. Historic and current research that is the foundation of code
requirements will be discussed.

END

CEE 08584:

Prestressed Concrete

The course focuses on analysis and design of prestressed concrete members for highway bridges, parking structures, office
buildings and industrial buildings. Topics covered include prestressed construction applications and materials, flexural
analysis of pretensioned and post-tensioning beams, bending and shear design, loss of prestress, deflection and composite
beams. The course includes appropriate computer applications.

END

CEE 08585:

Advanced Reinforced Concrete

The emphasis is the design of advanced reinforced concrete structures and structural components not covered in an
introductory reinforced concrete design course. Topics include columns in bending, slender columns, slab systems, and
other advanced topics in reinforced concrete.

END

CEE 08586:

Bridge Engineering

The analysis and design of modern steel highway bridges utilizing the bridge code of the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials is emphasized. The topics covered include bridge loads, load combinations, design
methods, reinforced concrete deck slabs, steel wide-flange stringer bridges, steel composite wide-flange stringer bridges,
continuous bridge spans, steel composite plate-girder bridges, elastomeric bearing connections, steel fixed bridge
connections, and steel roller bridge connections. The course includes appropriate computer applications.

END

CEE 08588:

Advanced Pavement Rehabilitation Methods

This graduate course provides a wide knowledge in pavement distresses and rehabilitation, data collection and monitoring,
pavement performance modeling, and economic analysis. Pavement rehabilitation and management is an essential part of
pavement engineering as it improves the safety of our roadways and preserves our infrastructure assets. This course will use
practical, industry-based data, methods, and evaluation techniques to evaluate roadway conditions, determine appropriate
rehabilitation strategies, and assess economic impacts of pavement management. The graduate course will also include a
semester long case-based research study using collected pavement performance data. Recent research on the influences of
innovative technologies and sustainability on pavement rehabilitation strategies will be discussed

END

CEE 08603:

Special Topics for Doctoral Students in Civil Engineering

This course presents timely coverage of specific advanced and emerging topics in civil engineering, and it is intended for
doctoral students. Special topics courses may be traditional classroom-based courses as well as research-related courses
supervised by specific advisers. This class may be taken multiple times when offered with different special topics content.

END

CEE 08643:

Coastal Engineering

This course introduces coastal engineering processes. Topics include water wave mechanics, nearshore hydrodynamics,
impacts of tides, sediment transport, and coastal structures. This course also (1) collects and analyzes field data (e.g., water
elevations, waves, winds), and/or (2) introduces and investigates real-world projects.

END

CEE 08658:

Engineering Geology and Rock Engineering

This course provides a wide knowledge in engineering geology, rock mechanics and associated engineering applications,
which will cover topics such as geological structures, geological map, rock types and minerals, laboratory and field testing of
rocks, rock excavations and support, and rock structures (e.g. slopes, foundations, caverns, tunnels). Engineering geology
and rock engineering form the backbone of today's fossil energy exploration, energy production, geological storage and
subsurface infrastructures. The influences of rock properties on the engineering performance of rock structures will be
discussed. Students will have the opportunity to access and operate experiments on rock microstructure characterization
from the research lab.

END

CEE 08673:

Structural Reliability

This course provides an outline for structural reliability analysis. The course covers the goals of structural reliability,
including hazard analysis, reliability analysis, and structural design philosophy. The course applies advanced theories of
probability and statistics, random variables analysis, and the Monte Carlo simulation technique to develop structural design
concepts such as limit state functions, reliability and probability of failure analysis, load model, resistance model, system
reliability analysis, and Code calibration. Structural reliability can be used to design new structures and assess existing
infrastructural systems. Hence, many modern design codes utilize structural reliability concepts based on probabilistic
models of load and resistance design (LRFD). Students will have the opportunity to access and perform computational
analysis to analyze the probability of the failure of the structural components and system regarding the reliability index.
Also, the students will learn the essence of the LRFD design equations and how to quantify the load and resistance factors
using the calibration process.

END

CEE 08675:

Fracture Mechanics

This course covers the behavior of cracks in bodies, and has a wide range of applications. Discussion focuses on the
treatment of the singular stress and strain fields that occur near crack tips, with particular emphasis on fracture mechanics
parameters such as K, G and J. Course material will include both elastic and plastic behavior. Both approximate and exact
approaches will be considered. Numerical and analytical solutions and solution techniques will be presented. This course
might not be offered annually.

END

ENGR 01469:

Introduction to Connected Vehicle Technology

Connected Vehicle Technology (CVT) has potential to transform the existing surface transportation system into next
generation sustainable transportation system by improving safety, operational efficiency, and reducing environmental
impacts. The success of connected mobility relies on efficient integration of traffic flow principles, advanced sensors,
computing tools & electronics, communications technologies, and management strategies. However, the transportation
professionals will be required to master complexity of connected mobility systems and its components to evaluate, operate,
and maintain future surface transportation systems. This course will introduce characteristics of the future mobility systems
and overview of planning, designing, deploying and operating of future connected mobility systems. The course is designed
for students that are familiar with intelligent transportation system.

END

ENGR 01569:

Connected Vehicle Technology

This course will introduce characteristics of the future mobility systems and overview of planning, designing, deploying and
operating of future connected mobility systems. The advanced multidisciplinary topics include wireless communication
technologies, transportation data analytics and traffic simulation. Students will utilize advanced tools to plan and design
connected vehicle technology applications. The course is designed for students that are familiar with intelligent
transportation system.

END

ENGR 01580:

Advanced Viscoelasticity

This course covers the fundamentals of linear and non-linear viscoelastic behavior of materials: constitutive modeling,
experimental development of material properties, and solution of classic problems. Non-linear viscoelasticity and the effect
of temperature on non-linear viscoelastic properties are presented. Standard experimental methods to characterize
determine viscoelastic properties are discussed. Classic solutions, and the use of time-temperature superposition of
solutions, are presented. In addition, the doctoral students will conduct testing and analysis of viscoelastic material to
validate existing viscoelastic models. This course might not be offered annually.

END

STEM 01540:

STEM: Automative & Robotics for Middle School Teachers

Prerequisites: completed Bachelor's degree in any of the sciences, math, elementary education, secondary education or engineering.
Currently teaching high school level science/ math /technology (or hired to teach in the fall term) in a school using the PL TW curriculum.

This course uses solid modeling to introduce students to the design process. Utilizing this design approach, students
understand how solid modeling has influenced their lives. Students also learn sketching techniques, and use descriptive
geometry as a component of design, measurement, and computer modeling. Using design briefs or abstracts, students create
models and documentation to solve problems. This course is a credit-bearing companion to the Project Lead the Way (PL
TW) non-credit training in Design and Modeling for teachers. Teachers interested in enrolling in this class must be
currently enrolled in the PLTW course. Faculty Workload Hours: TBD This course will be taught by adjuncts selected from
a pool of Project Lead the Way master teachers at the mutual agreement of Rowan and PL TW at a rate established
nationally by PLTW and its University Affiliates Info for Registrar only. Faculty Load Hours does not appear in the
catalogue)

END

STEM 01541:

STEM: Design & Solid Modeling Middle School

Prerequisites: completed Bachelor's degree in any of the sciences, math, elementary education, secondary education or engineering.
Currently teaching high school level science/ math /technology (or hired to teach in the fall term) in a school using the PL TW curriculum.

This course uses solid modeling to introduce students to the design process. Utilizing this design approach, students
understand how solid modeling has influenced their lives. Students also learn sketching techniques, and use descriptive
geometry as a component of design, measurement, and computer modeling. Using design briefs or abstracts, students create
models and documentation to solve problems. This course is a credit-bearing companion to the Project Lead the Way (PL
TW) non-credit training in Design and Modeling for teachers. Teachers interested in enrolling in this class must be
currently enrolled in the PLTW course. Faculty Workload Hours: TBD This course will be taught by adjuncts selected from
a pool of Project Lead the Way master teachers at the mutual agreement of Rowan and PL TW at a rate established
nationally by PLTW and its University Affiliates Info for Registrar only.

END

STEM 01550:

STEM: Engineering Designs & Solid Modeling

Prerequisites: completed Bachelor's degree in any of the sciences, math, elementary education, secondary education or engineering.
Currently teaching high school level science/ math /technology (or hired to teach in the fall term) in a school using the PL TW curriculum.

This course introduces content that high school teachers would find appropriate for 9th or 10 th grade students who are
interested in design and engineering. The major focus of the course is to expose students to design process, research and
analysis, teamwork, communication methods, global and human impacts, engineering standards, and technical
documentation. The course applies and concurrently develops secondary level knowledge and skills in mathematics, science,and technology. The course of study includes: Design Process; Modeling; Sketching; Measurement; Statistics; Applied
Geometry; Presentation Design and Delivery; Engineering Drawing Standards; CAD Solid Modeling; and Reverse
Engineering. This course is a credit-bearing companion to the Project Lead the Way (PLTW) non-credit training called
Introduction to Engineering Design for teachers. Teachers interested in enrolling in this class must be currently enrolled in
the PL TW course.

END

STEM 01551:

Principles of Engineering for High School Teachers

Prerequisites: completed Bachelor's degree in any of the sciences, math, elementary education, secondary education or engineering.
Currently teaching high school level science/ math /technology (or hired to teach in the fall term) in a school using the PL TW curriculum.

This course is a credit-bearing companion to the Project Lead the Way (PLTW) non-credit training called Principles of
Engineering. Teachers interested in enrolling in this class must be currently enrolled in the PL TW course. Faculty
Workload Hours: TBD This course will be taught by adjuncts selected from a pool of Project Lead the Way master teachers
at the mutual agreement of Rowan and PL TW at a rate established nationally by PL TW and its University Affiliates.

END

STEM 01552:

STEM: Digital Electronics for High School Teachers

Prerequisites: completed Bachelor's degree in any of the sciences, math, elementary education, secondary education or engineering.

Currently teaching high school level science/ math /technology (or hired to teach in the fall term) in a school using the PL TW 
curriculum. Digital Electronics for High School Teachers is the study of electronic circuits that are used to process and 
control digital signals. The major focus of this course is to expose students to the process of combinational and sequential 
logic design, teamwork, communication methods,  engineering standards, and technical documentation. Utilizing the
activity-project-problem-based (APPB) teaching and learning pedagogy, students will analyze, design and build digital
electronic circuits. This course introduces educators to content that is appropriate for 1Oth or 11th grade students
interested in electronics. This course assumes no previous electronics knowledge however proficiency in college preparatory
math is needed. This course is a credit-bearing companion to the Project Lead the Way (PLTW) non-credit training in
Digital Electronics for teachers. Teachers interested in enrolling in this class must be currently enrolled in the PLTW
course.

END

STEM 01553:

STEM: Civil Engineering and Architecture for High School Teachers

Prerequisites: completed Bachelor's degree in any of the sciences, math, elementary education, secondary education or engineering.

Currently teaching high school level science/ math /technology (or hired to teach in the fall term) in a school using the PL TW curriculum.
Currently teaching high school level science/ math /technology (or hired to teach in the fall term) in a school using the PL
TW curriculum. The major focus of this course is a long term project that involves the development of a local property site.
As students learn about various aspects of civil engineering and architecture, they apply what they learn to the design and
development of this property. The course of study includes the roles of civil engineers and architects, project planning, site
planning, building design, and project documentation and presentation. This course is a credit-bearing companion to the
Project Lead the Way (PLTW) non-credit training in Civil Engineering and Architecture for teachers. Teachers interested
in enrolling in this class must be currently enrolled in the PL TW course.

END

CEE 08563:

Advanced Pavement Analysis And Evaluation

The fundamental theme of the course is the engineering study of pavement response. The topics covered include
non-linear behavior of pavement materials and interaction between tires and pavements. Modeling and analysis of pavement
behavior will also be taught, with content varying based upon instructor and student interests. The course includes field
experiments and computer applications.

END

CMS 04208:

Business and Professional Communication

Prerequisites: CMS 04205

This course offers a unique emphasis on communication in the workplace. Techniques for negotiating communication in
today’s ever-changing business world will be focused on, with attention to business communication concepts. These
concepts range from management and leadership models to ethics in message communication. Significant attention to
various aspects of business presentations and interviewing strategies help to prepare students for success regardless of their
past experience.

END

CMS 04210:

Mass Media And Their Influences

Prerequisites: ENGL 05105 or COMP 01112 or ENGR 01201 or permission of instructor

This course studies the impact on our daily lives of television, radio, films, magazines and newspapers. Students examine
how the media influence politics, purchases, and entertainment, and how the media affect the culture in shaping beliefs and
attitudes. It discusses how each of the media operates and what each accomplishes. This course examines the gap between
real life and "mediated" reality.

END

CMS 04215:

Fiction To Film

Prerequisites: 30 credits required

This course provides comparative study of film and literature. Students learn the critical vocabulary of literature and film
and enhance their understanding of both art forms. The course covers American and foreign works.

END

CMS 04220:

Interpersonal Communication

Students explore the basic theories and concepts of interpersonal communication research. Some areas to be covered
include perception and social cognition, the relationship of culture to interpersonal communication, self-perception and
communication, interpersonal systems, sex/gender and interpersonal communication, and interpersonal communication
contexts (i.e., family, friendship, romance).

END

CMS 04225:

Semantics

Prerequisites: 30 credits required

This course makes students aware of the relationship between language and human behavior and of the use and abuse of
verbal and non-verbal language. It emphasizes meaning, the classification and abstraction processes and the application of
semantic principles to the language of literature, politics, advertising and prejudice.

END

CMS 04250:

Communication Theory

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or ENGR 01201 or permission of instructor

This sophomore-level course acquaints students with current theories as they apply to a variety of communication
environments. Drawing upon a wealth of timely research, students study theories relating to interpersonal, small group,
organizational, public and mass communication. The course presents theories through readings as well as extensive class
discussion.

END

CMS 04260:

Organizational Communication Theory And Research

Prerequisites: Comp 01112 or ENGR 01201

Organizational Communication theory and research introduces students to the basics of organizational communication.
The class will focus on how scholars and researchers study and understand the communication patterns and relationships
that go on in organizations. Students will be asked to consider a variety of perspectives and theories of organizational
communication while comparing them to each other and to their own experiences as organizational actors.

END

CMS 04290:

Rhetorical Theory

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or ENGR 01201

Rhetorical Theory introduces students to the concept of rhetoric and how it has been theorized from antiquity to the
present. The course provides students with a systematic history of rhetorical theory and spotlights significant theorists such
as Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, Blair and Burke. Students will explore how both ancient and contemporary theories of rhetoric
apply to contemporary society.

END

CMS 04315:

Digital Media Processes

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course examines the social, economic, and cultural implications of the use of digital media. Students taking this course
will learn how to critically analyze digital platforms including Google, social media, and video games. The course includes
analyses of data infrastructures, socio-cultural implications of data collection and content targeting, and breakdowns of how
digital structures function.

END

CMS 04318:

Leadership Communication

This course surveys theories of leadership communication and looks at leaders from different fields, including business,
political, social, religious, and cultural, analyzing their ethical communication, and their vision and transformational
influence. The course provides a basic introduction to leadership by focusing on the social construction of leaders and
followers. The course will examine topics such as: the nature of leadership, theories of communication and leadership,
communication ethics in leadership, creating a vision, communication leadership globally, and leadership for the greater
good. The course will combine the theory and practice of leadership communication by having an applied component, such
as case study analyses of “real world” leaders, and personal reflection of students’ leadership communication skills. Attention
will be given to helping students to understand and improve their own leadership performance.

END

CMS 04325:

Linguistics

Students study the nature of human language by examining four major components: phonology, semantics, syntax, and
morphology. Linguistics principally emphasizes linguistic universals, characteristics which all human languages share.
Students discuss dialect formation, first-language acquisition in children, and animal communication systems. Students also
compare modern linguistic theories.

END

CMS 04575:

Advanced Special Topics In Communication Studies

Advanced Special Topics in Communication Studies allows students the opportunity to study a specific area of the field of
communication studies with great depth. Course topics change as new trends develop and as student interest necessitates
scheduling. Topics are selected on the basis of timeliness and the availability of expert staff. General topics are announced as
the course is scheduled. Permission of instructor is required for undergraduate enrollment so that adequate preparation for
course topic can be ascertained. This course is not offered annually.

END

CS 01102:

Introduction To Programming

This course acquaints students with the logical structure of a computer, the algorithmic formulation of problems, and a
modern high-level programming language. Extensive programming experience is included in the course. Proficiency
equivalent to Basic Algebra II (MATH01.195) is expected for this course.

END

CS 01104:

Introduction to Programming and Problem Solving

This course emphasizes algorithmic solutions of problems. The syntax of the programming language is also studied, as well
as the writing of structured code. Proficiency equivalent to Basic Algebra II.

END

CS 01105:

Web Literacy

This is an introductory course on the world wide web, exposing how it works, and showing students how to use it
appropriately. This course teaches students to create and modify basic web pages with markup languages and style
directives, and how to embed non-text information such as video, images, and sound. The principles of publishing websites
on the Internet and the process by which a page is delivered to end users will also be covered.

END

CS 01211:

Principles Of Information Security

Students will be exposed to the spectrum of security activities, methods, technologies, and threats. This course will cover a
range of key topics in the area of information and computer security including inspection and protection of information
assets, detection of and reaction to security threats, taxonomy of security threats, and concentrating on issues in computer
and operating systems security, principles of network security, and basics of cryptography.

END

CS 01501:

Essentials of Computer Science I

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Bioinformatics program OR the MS Cybersecurity program OR permission of program coordinator

In this course, students will be exposed to the main principles of essential computer science fundamentals and will develop
a deeper understanding of advanced topics including systems programming of complex, low level software interacting with
the hardware platform and operating system along with performance constraints. Students will also be proficient with basic
scripting and programming in creating simple automated scripts/programs and implementing algorithms utilizing security
practices such as bounds checking and input validation.

END

CS 01502:

Essentials of Computer Science II

Prerequisites: CS 01501 Essentials of Computer Science I plus matriculation in the MS Bioinformatics program OR the MS
Cybersecurity program OR permission of the program coordinator

This course covers advanced facets of numerical, object and string data types as well as different types and categories of
data structures including lists (array lists, linked list, doubly linked list, other list types, hash tables), arrays, heaps, queue,
stacks, buffers, trees and tables in a relational database. Students will be expected to list the most common structures and
data formats for storing data in a computer system, discuss the advantages and disadvantages of different data
structures/formats, utilize and implement common data structures. Other topics to be discussed include the SQL query
language, efficiency calculations for searching and sorting algorithms, and Linux scripting.

END

CS 01541:

Bioinformatics - Advanced Computational Aspects

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program or MS Bioinformatics or permission of the program coordinator

This course introduces the advanced student to the computer hardware, software, algorithms and statistical packages that
are used in computational aspects of bioinformatics. Hardware topics include multiprocessor clusters, high performance
computing, and parallelism. Software topics include message passing and shared memory styles of parallel/concurrent
programming languages, databases, avalilable software packages, and visualization techniques for large data sets. Algorithms
and statistical packages include those for the studey of molecular biology, evolution, structural biology, and biological
networks. Students will design and carry out an independent research project using and developing appropriate
bioinformatics algorithms, software and/or hardware. Undergraduate preparation in Calculus, Statistics (preferably
Biostatistics), and Introduction to Computer Programming is strongly suggested.

END

CS 01561:

Advanced Computer Environments

This is an advanced applications course in which the student will learn the effective use of various computer applications
for organizing and managing their professional duties, including functioning in computer-supported collaborative work
groups. Some specific skills that will be covered include the use of desktop publishing to prepare business plans, advertising
copy, etc., the creation and maintenance of World Wide Web pages, the use of presentation packages, the integration of
graphics into traditional or multimedia documents, and the use of Internet and commercial data bases (including analysis of
data using spreadsheet tools). Students will report on emerging trends in hardware and software and will review issues
relating to data security and ethics.

END

CS 02505:

Data Mining I

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR the MS Data Science program OR the COGS in Computational Data Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This is a first graduate level course in Data Mining, which is designed to teach students the key steps in data mining, along
with the primary algorithms related to data acquisition, cleansing, and supervised and unsupervised learning.

END

CS 02516:

Big Data Tools and Techniques

This is an advanced big data course that will expand students’ knowledge of the tools for loading, storing, visualizing and
analyzing Big-Data concepts along with NO SQL Databases & Databricks. The course will cover such topics as the concepts
and technology behind Big Data, Cloud, Spark, NO SQL Databases.

END

CS 02530:

Advanced Database Systems: Theory And Programming

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR the MS Data Science program OR the COGS in
Computational Data Science program OR the COGS in Software Engineering program OR permission of the program coordinator

This course focuses on the design of DBMS and their use to create databases. The course covers both the theoretical
concepts and the implementation aspects of database systems with a special emphasis on relational database systems, SQL,
programming (in a modern programming language such as C++ or Java) using a real database Application Programming
Interface (such as JDBC or ODBC).

END

CS 02570:

Information Visualization

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR the MS Data Science program OR the COGS in Computational Data Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This is a graduate level course in Information Visualization. Topics covered include graphics programming, information
visualization general principles, visualization techniques for 1-dimensional, 2-dimensional, and N-dimensional information,
graph visualization, visualization techniques for image and digital libraries, as well as for the World Wide Web, interactivity,
theories behind information visualization, and focus+context techniques. This course also includes the implementation of
techniques presented in lecture. Students are encouraged to devise new techniques, implement them, and determine their
effectiveness. Students will be required to complete in-depth assignments, read, summarize, and present recent journal
papers from the information visualization literature, and prepare term papers with regard to an information visualization
research topic. Students will also be required to specify, design, implement, and document a semester-long software project
related to information visualization.

END

CS 02605:

Data Mining II

Prerequisites: CS 02505 Data Mining I plus matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR the MS Data Science program
OR the COGS in Computational Data Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This course follows Data Mining I which is designed to train students in the necessary algorithms for extracting
intelligence from large datasets. In Data Mining II, more advanced topics are covered including advanced clustering
techniques, Principal Component Analysis, Naïve Bayes clustering and other techniques.

END

CS 02620:

Data Warehousing

Prerequisites: CS 02530 Advanced Database Systems: Theory and Programming plus matriculation in the MS Computer Science
program OR the MS Data Science program OR the COGS in Computational Data Science program OR permission of the program
coordinator

This course is designed to teach students data modeling, enterprise data integration, and other issues related to managing
massive data sets necessary for data mining for business intelligence. The course focuses on data warehousing and cloud
storage, with an emphasis on modeling and architectures, and their application to decision support.

END

CS 02625:

Data Quality and Web Text Mining

Prerequisites: CS 02530 Advanced Database Systems: Theory and Programming plus matriculation in the MS Computer program OR
the MS Data Science program OR the COGS in Computational Data Science program OR the COGS in Health Data Management
program or permission of the program coordinator

This course studies data quality problems and solutions in the context of text and web mining, which is the exploration of
vast amounts of digitized text for use in knowledge discovery or more particularly drug discovery in the biomedical field.

END

CS 02630:

Advanced Topics in Database Systems

Prerequisite: CS 02530 Advanced Database Systems: Theory and Programming plus matriculation in the MS Computer Science
program OR the MS Data Science program OR the COGS in Software Engineering program or permission of the program coordinator

This course will introduce a broad spectrum of database technologies with a particular focus on NoSQL systems.
Contrasting database approaches will be assessed and evaluated. Topics discussed will be advanced and contemporary, and
selected from areas such as distributed databases, sharding, principles of physical data storage, use of publishing/subscribe
models, blob storage, geospatial and time-sequence databases, and object-relational modeling. Students will be expected to
deliver applications in a variety of modern databases and critically analyze scholarly database articles.

END

CS 03500:

Foundations of Cybersecurity

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the MS Cybersecurity program OR the COGS in Cybersecurity Principles or permission from the program coordinator

This course introduces students to the fundamental cybersecurity concepts and provides students with basic security
design principles and fundamentals. The topics of the course also include the components and their functions of an
information technology system, cyber threats and different types of attacks and attackers, and application of forensics
techniques to investigate and analyze network traffic.

END

CS 03506:

Cybersecurity Management, Policy, and Risk

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the MS Cybersecurity program OR the COGS in Cybersecurity Principles or permission from the program coordinator

This course covers cybersecurity planning and management, security risk analysis, policy, legal, ethics and compliance
issues and security program management from a technical cybersecurity perspective.

END

CS 03551:

Advanced Cyber Security: Principles and Applications

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the MS in Computer Science program OR the MS Cybersecurity program OR the COGS in
Cybersecurity Principles OR the COGS in Cybersecurity Architecture OR permission of the program coordinator

This graduate course examines the principles of cyber security and will introduce students to a wide range of security
activities, methodologies, and procedures. The topics covered in the course include fundamental concepts of computer
security: threats, attacks, and assets; principles of cryptography: encryption, decryption, authentication, and
non-repudiation; software security and trusted systems: developing secure software, buffer overflow attacks, operating
security issues, trusted systems; network security: intrusion detection, firewalls and intrusion prevention systems,
distributed denial-of-service attacks, malicious software, protocols for network security; as well as other topics.

END

CS 03570:

Cyber Defense Of Operating Systems and Networks

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS in Computer Science program OR the MS Cybersecurity program OR the COGS in
Cybersecurity Principles OR the COGS in Cybersecurity Architecture OR MS Computer Science Accelerated and CS 01501 and CS
01502 or permission of the program coordinator

This course covers an in depth look on the role of operating system security, its basic functions, and the services it provides
related to cyber attacks. Students will become familiar with typical network cyber attacks and their defenses as well as how
these attacks can influence the behavior of an operating system. Students will also learn how to assess the security
capabilities of a computing system using some standard evaluation criteria (such as the Trusted Computer System
Evaluation Criteria used by the Department of Defense). Students will then learn to improve the robustness of an operating
system by applying methods related to managing applications, services and network ports to harden an operating system. At
least one open source operating system's capabilities will be studied as it relates to the chosen standard evaluation criteria.

END

CS 03580:

Cloud Computing and the Internet of Things

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS in Computer Science program OR the MS Cybersecurity program OR the COGS in Cybersecurity 
Principles OR the COGS in Cybersecurity Architecture OR COGS in Networks OR permission of the program coordinator

This course studies the essential characteristics and services of cloud platforms, their security, their internal structure, and
their possibilities and limitations. It provides hands-on experiences in areas such as cloud infrastructure components,
security implications of cloud resources, typical instruction sets and architectures of embedded systems, IoT system
architectures, IoT networking and security, MQTT and REST protocols, cyber considerations and issues related to
embedded systems and IoT devices.

END

CS 03695:

Advanced Topics in Cybersecurity

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the MS in Cybersecurity program or permission from the program coordinator

This course enables the faculty to offer courses in advanced topics in Cybersecurity which are not offered on a regular basis.

END

CS 04103:

Computer Science And Programming

Prerequisites: MATH 01122 OR MATH 01130 OR CS 01104

This course emphasizes programming methodology, algorithms and simple data structures. Topics to be covered include
top down design of functions and classes, basic data abstraction and encapsulation, control structures, file i/o, user defined
classes and object-oriented principles.

END

CS 04110:

Introduction To Programming Using Robots

This course teaches fundamental programming skills centered in the context of robot programming. Students will program
small robots to perform a variety of tasks. In addition to learning a sophisticated programming language, students will gain
skills in design techniques and experience working in teams to build complex systems.

END

CS 04113:

Introduction To Object Oriented Programming

Prerequisites: MATH 01122 or MATH 01130

This course introduces the fundamental concepts of programming from an object-oriented perspective. Topics are drawn
from classes and objects, abstraction, encapsulation, data types, calling methods and passing parameters decisions, loops,
arrays and collections, documentation, testing and debugging, exceptions, design issues, inheritance and polymorphic
variables and methods. The course emphasizes modern software engineering and design. Students are expected to be
sufficiently proficient in mathematics such that they are ready to take Calculus I (MATH 01130).

END

CS 04114:

Object Oriented Programming And Data Abstraction

Prerequisites: CS 04113 or (CS 04103 and CS 04112)

Objects and data abstraction continues from Introduction to Object-Oriented Programming to the methodology of
programming from an object-oriented perspective. Through the study of object design, this course introduces software
engineering and focuses on file I/O, function prototypes, exception handling, decoupling strategies, and other advanced
topics.

END

CS 04171:

Creating Android Applications

Prerequisites: None

This course is designed for students who want to start developing mobile applications on Android platforms and
understand the basic concepts of Computer Science. The course will start with the basics of Android programming by
covering the most recent version of Android and understanding its development framework. Students will then learn to
develop feature-rich Android applications using the MIT App Inventor Integrated Development Environment and learn
the basic "Big Ideas" of Computer Science such as, algorithmic thinking, abstractions, logic, flow control, and data
representation, storage and manipulation.

END

CS 04222:

Data Structures And Algorithms

Prerequisites: CS 04.114 (C- or better) and MATH 03.160 or MATH 03.150; Corequisite: CS 01205

This course features programs of realistic complexity. The programs utilize data structures (string, lists, graphs, stacks,
trees) and algorithms (searching, sorting, etc.) for manipulating these data structures. The course emphasizes interactive
design and includes the use of microcomputer systems and direct access data files.

END

CS 04225:

Principles of Data Structures

Prerequisites: CS 04103 or CS 04113 Minimum Grade of C-

The course features programs of realistic complexity. The programs utilize data structures (strings, lists, graphs, stacks) and
algorithms (searching, sorting, etc.) for manipulating these data structures. The course emphasizes interactive design and
includes the use of microcomputer systems and direct access data files.

END

CS 04315:

Programming Languages

Prerequisites: (CS 04222 or CS 04225 ) and ( CS 06205 or ECE 09241)

A study of the fundamental principles underlying the design of programming languages. Students will study two or more
languages from contrasting programming paradigms such as Functional, Object-Oriented, Logical, or Concurrent.

END

CS 04390:

Operating Systems

Prerequisites: CS 04222 and CS 06205

The course concentrates on the design and functions of the operating systems of multi-user computers. Its topics include
time sharing methods of memory allocation and protection, files, CPU scheduling, input-output management, interrupt
handling, deadlocking and recovery and design principles. The course discusses one or more operating systems for small
computers, such as UNIX.

END

CS 04400:

Computer Science - Senior Project

Prerequisites: CS 01205 and CS 07340 and CS 07321

This is an advanced programming course in which students work on large-scale individual or team programming projects
and make a formal presentation on their work. The course discusses program development, methodologies and strategies.

END

CS 04515:

Embedded Systems Programming

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR the COGS in Software Engineering program OR permission of the program coordinator

Embedded software is used in almost every electronic device. This course deals with software issues that arise in embedded
systems programming. Important concepts covered in this course will include device programming interfaces, device
drivers, multi-tasking with real-time constraints, task synchronization, device testing and debugging, and embedded
software development tools such as emulators and debuggers. These concepts will be applied to design and implement
embedded software for one or more modest-sized embedded systems.

END

CS 04524:

Agile Software Engineering

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR the COGS in Software Engineering program OR permission of the program coordinator

In this, course students apply in-depth techniques and experience various roles incorporated into the agile software
engineering methodology. Ann overview of each of the major software engineering phases is provided and then applied
towards the development of faster and more adaptable software. Proficiency in programming is expected of the students
entering this course. Students are required to complete in-depth assignments, read, summarize, and present recent journal
papers from the agile software engineering literature, and prepare term papers with regard to an agile software engineering
research topic.

END

CS 04548:

Programming Languages: Theory, Implementation And Application

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR the COGS in Software Engineering program OR permission of the program coordinator

An intermediate course intended to acquaint the student with the major categories of programming languages and to
familiarize the student with one or two languages in each category. The student will complete programming projects in the
languages studied. In addition, the student will learn formal mechanisms for specifying the syntax and semantics of
languages and techniques for implementing data and control structures.

END

CS 04563:

Parallel and Concurrent Programming

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR the COGS in Software Engineering program OR permission of the program coordinator

Concurrency and parallelism are both used with respect to multithreaded programming. This course will cover techniques
on improving performance and/or responsiveness based on topics in parallel programming and concurrent programming.
Such topics may include optimizing the underlying parallel resources of a particular machine (such as multiple cores),
machine clustering, synchronization mechanisms (such as locking), responses to simultaneous occurring events, processes
and multithreading, context switching, race conditions or shared-memory multiprocessors. The course will also explore
research into parallel and concurrent programming as well as new advances in the field.

END

CS 04564:

Compiler Design Theory

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This course centers on the design and use of compilers, the sophisticated computer programs whose function is to
translate high-level code to machine language. The following topics are covered: Compiler models, finite state machines, the
lexical box, context free grammars, translation grammars, pushdown machines, the syntax box, and the code generator.

END

CS 04565:

Systems Programming

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This course covers the internal structures and algorithms of the system kernel of a modern operating system as well as the
system call interface to the kernel. Students will gain hands-on experience in system level programming in a modern
operating system environment. The emphasis will be on interprocess communications and concurrency. The concept of
distributed and client/server computing will also be introduced.

END

CS 04571:

Advanced Topics in Mobile Programming

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

Students will explore advanced topics in mobile application development. This course explores mobile application genres
and the various development tools, languages and environments which are used to create them. The subject starts by
requiring students to investigate the mobile application landscape and study some general purpose software development
issues and techniques. It then requires each students to choose one of three implementation platforms: iOS (for Apple
iPhone), .NET (for Windows Phone 7) or Java (for Android) and to study application development for that platform,
implementing a modest application as a core requirement of their study. The subject concludes by looking, in theory, at the
different deployment and distribution mechanisms used by mobile application vendors.

END

CS 04580:

Human Centered Computing

Designed for a mixed population of Computer Science and Psychology students, this class will explore design
methodologies and principles. Students will critically evaluate all sorts of interfaces including Windows, Internet search
engines, mobile devices, web sites, computer games, simulation environments and remote control devices. Students will
learn strategies for prototyping, learn how bootstrapping can build rapid interfaces, conduct usability research, critically
analyze scholarly research, get a glimpse into disciplines such as natural language, robotics and information visualization,
mine recent case studies for insights, explore some of the latest technological developments at industry leaders like Google,
and learn to appreciate the differences and subtleties between good and bad design

END

CS 04590:

Computer Game Design And Development

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This is a graduate level course that investigates advances in technology, science, art, and culture involved in the creation of
computer games. Games will be examined in a systems context to understand gaming and game design fundamentals.
Students will be required to complete in-depth assignments and present recent conference or journal papers from the
computer gaming and game design fundamentals. Students will be required to complete in-depth assignments and present
recent conference or journal papers from the computer gaming literature. Extensive study of past and current games will be
used to illustrate course concepts. Students will also be required to specify, design, implement, and document a
semester-long software project related to computer animation.

END

CS 04605:

Advanced Web Programming

CS 02530 Advanced Database Systems: Theory and Programming plus matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This course teaches students to create and modify sophisticated data-driven web pages using client-server architecture.
Topics covered include non-text information such as video, images, sound, custom web applications, asynchronous
communication, accessibility, searching, security, and web server configuration.

END

CS 04623:

Advanced Software Engineering

Prerequisites: CS 04524 Agile Software Engineering plus Matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR the COG in Software
Engineering program OR permission of the program coordinator

Students will apply their knowledge from Agile Software Engineering to explore in greater depth advanced theory and
practice of software engineering techniques. Emphasis will be placed on new and emerging methodologies like SAFE, Lean,
Kanban. Students will be expected to compare and contrast various methodologies and techniques and complete in-depth
assignments involving conference or journal papers from the software engineering literature.

END

CS 04670:

Advanced Object Oriented Design

Prerequisites: CS 04524 Agile Software Engineering plus Matriculation in the MS in Computer Science program OR the COGS in
Software Engineering program OR permission of the program coordinator

This course will introduce important concepts such as inheritance and polymorphism, which are crucial tools needed for
crafting object-oriented solutions to real-world problems. Design patterns that commonly occur in design situations will be
covered. A formal notation for describing and evaluating object-oriented designs such as the Unified Modeling Language
(UML) will be taught. Students will apply the concepts to design and implement object oriented solutions to one or more
reasonably sized real-world problems.

END

CS 06205:

Computer Organization

Prerequisites: Minimum Requirement C- for each of the following: (CS 04113 or CS 04103) and (MATH 03160 or MATH 03150) and Sophmore Standing

This course provides an introduction to computer organization. Students are exposed to the register level architecture of a
modern computer and its assembly language. The topics include machine level data representation, von Neumann
architecture and instruction execution cycle, memory hierarchy, I/O and interrupts, instruction sets and types, addressing
modes, instruction formats and translation.

END

CS 06310:

Principles Of Digital Computers

Prerequisites: CS 06205

This course provides an introduction to the fundamentals of computer hardware systems. The topics include digital logic,
combinational circuits, sequential circuits, memory system structure, bus and interconnection structure, computer
arithmetic and the ALU unit, I/O system structure, hardwired control unit, microprogrammed control unit, and alternative
computer architectures. This course is not open to students who have taken CS06.370 Digital Design and Lab.

END

CS 06311:

Digital Computer Laboratory

Corequisites: CS 06310 Prerequisites: CS 06205

This lab course provides the student with hands-on experience in the design and implementation of digital components.
State-of-the-art systems are used to design, test, and implement digital circuits: Combinational circuits, sequential circuits,
registers, counters, datapath, arithmetic/logic units, control units, and CPU design. This course is taken concurrently with
Principles of Digital Computers.

END

CS 06510:

Computer Networks

Prerequisites: Acceptance into the Computer ScienceMS or BS/MS program

Students in this course study how computer networks work and why they have been designed as we know them. The course
covers descriptive material on network architectures and protocols, as well as network performance evaluation and protocol
implementation. The course topics include important examples of local, metropolitan and wide area networks; telephone,
cellular and wireless networks; the Internet; network security; and design tradeoffs in network systems and their
implementations.

END

CS 06520:

Topics In Computer Architecture

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

Students in this course will study the various performance enhancement techniques and more advanced architectural
features of modern computer systems. The topics include DMA, I/O processor, RAID, cache memory, virtual memory,
pipelining, RISC, superscalar processors and various advanced parallel architectures such as array processors, vector
processors, shared-memory multiprocessors, and message-passing multicomputers. Students will complete independent
research projects that may include detailed examination of one or two contemporary computers.

END

CS 06560:

Design/Implement Operatng Systems

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

Design choices and implementation (algorithms and data structures) of the capabilities of a modern operating system,
including processes, concurrency, multithreading, synchronization, multiprocessors, CPU scheduling, interrupt handling,
deadlocks, memory management, secondary storage management, file systems, I/O, protection and security. Issues include
simplicity, efficiency, abstraction, microkernel, monolithic, client-server, mechanism vs. policy, caching.

END

CS 07210:

Foundations Of Computer Science

Prerequisites: C- or better in (MATH 03160 or MATH 03150) and one of the following: CS 01102, CS 04103, CS 01104 or CS 04113

This course provides an introduction to the theoretical foundations of computer science, including finite automata,
context-free grammars, Turing machines, and formal logic.

END

CS 07321:

Software Engineering I

Prerequisites: (CS04.222 or CS 04.225) and (CMS 04.205 or ENGR 01.202) and (WA 01.302 or ENGR 01.201)

An introduction to the discipline of Software Engineering. Students will explore the major phases of the Software
Lifecycle, including analysis, specification, design, implementation, and testing. Techniques for creating documentation and
using software development tools will be presented. Students will gain experience in these areas by working in teams to
develop a software system. Proficiency in programming is expected of the students entering this course.

END

CS 07340:

Design And Analysis Of Algorithms

Prerequisites: CS 04222 and CS 07210

In this course, students will learn to design and analyze efficient algorithms for sorting, searching, graphs, sets, matrices,
and other applications. Students will also learn to recognize and prove NP-Completeness.

END

CS 07422:

Theory Of Computing

Prerequisites: CS 04222 and MATH 01131 and CS 07210

This is an advanced course in the theoretical foundations of computer science, building on the introduction provided in
the Foundations of Computer Science course. It studies models of computers, such as finite automata and Turing machines,
formal languages, and computability, as well as the fundamentals of complexity theory and NP-completeness.

END

CS 07510:

Mathematical Foundations Of Computer Science

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This course provides a graduate-level introduction to the theoretical foundations of computer science, including finite
automata, context-free grammars, Turing machines, and formal logic.

END

CS 07523:

Advanced Software Engineering

Prerequisites: Acceptance into the Computer ScienceMS or BS/MS program

Students will apply their knowledge from Software Engineering to develop an advanced software system, working in teams.
The project will be taken through each of the major software development phases, and student teams will create appropriate
deliverables for each phase. Advanced modern software engineering topics such as critical systems, real-time systems, formal
specification and validation, and project management will be covered. Students will be required to complete in-depth
assignments involving conference or journal papers from the software engineering literature.

END

CS 07530:

Computer Science Thesis I

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

In consultation with the instructor, students will identify and research a specific area of computer science or computer
science education. Students will define a thesis project and develop a formal specification of their intended project for
completion in Computer Science Thesis II.

END

CS 07540:

Advanced Design And Analysis Of Algorithms

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR the MS Data Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

Students in this course will study efficient algorithms for sorting, searching, graphs, sets, matrices, and other applications,
and will learn to design and analyze new algorithms. Students will also learn to recognize and prove NP-Completeness.

END

CS 07556:

Machine Learning I

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This course introduces students to machine learning tasks at the graduate level including classification, regression, learning
with unlabeled data, common machine learning approaches, and mathematics required to understand advanced topics in
machine learning. Students will be exposed to topics such as data Issues in machine learning, Information-based learning
(Decision Tree), Similarity-based learning (k-nearest neighbor), Probabilistic-based learning (naïve Bayes, Maximum A
Posteriori, Bayesian Network), Linear Models (Perceptron, Linear Regression, Logistic Regression), Support Vector
Machine, Neural Network, Performance measure and evaluation, Descriptive Statistics and Result Visualization, Learning
with unlabeled data (clustering), Mathematics for Advanced Topics in Machine Learning (Topics in Probability, Linear
Algebra, and Optimization).

END

CS 07559:

Advanced Models of Deep Learning

Prerequisites: Admission to the Master of Science in Data Science program

This course will teach students the comprehensive landscape of deep learning including theoretical foundations and
mechanics of training neural nets designed to perform various tasks, assessing the data and computational needs for training
and deploying various types of deep neural nets. The emphasis will be on the latest breakthroughs in algorithms and models,
while leveraging a popular programming platform to implements variations and combinations of those algorithms and make
them deployable and efficient.

END

CS 07565:

Computer Vision

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This course examines the fundamental issues in computer vision and major approaches that address them. The topics
include image formation, image filtering and transforms, image features, mathematical morphology, segmentation, and
object recognition. More advanced topics such as camera calibration, stereopsis, dynamic vision, and computer
architectures for vision will also be covered. Independent projects on these advanced topics will be required.

END

CS 07570:

Information Visualization

This is a graduate level course in Information Visualization. Topics covered include graphics programming, information
visualization general principles, visualization techniques for 1-dimensional, 2-dimensional, and N-dimensional information,
graph visualization, visualization techniques for image and digital libraries, as well as for the World Wide Web, interactivity,
theories behind information visualization, and focus+context techniques. This course also includes the implementation of
techniques presented in lecture. Students are encouraged to devise new techniques, implement them, and determine their
effectiveness. Students will be required to complete in-depth assignments, read, summarize, and present recent journal
papers from the information visualization literature, and prepare term papers with regard to an information visualization
research topic. Students will also be required to specify, design, implement, and document a semester-long software project
related to information visualization.

END

CS 07575:

TCP/IP And Internet Protocols And Technologies

Prerequisites: Acceptance into the Computer ScienceMS or BS/MS program

This is an advanced computer networking course that will expand students knowledge received in the Data
Communications and Networking course. This course will examine operation of the TCP/IP protocol as well as design and
architecture of the Internet. This course will cover such topics as: medium access protocols, address resolution protocols,
Internet routing, Internet Protocol (IP), Quality of Service, Transport Protocol, and congestion control mechanisms. This
course will also include selected topics on network security and network management. Students will prepare and delivertechnical presentations on state-of-the-art research topics in the Internet.

END

CS 07595:

Advanced Topics In Computer Science

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This course enables the faculty to offer courses in advanced topics which are not offered on a regular basis. Prerequisites
will vary according to the specific topic being studied.

END

CS 07622:

Advanced Theory Of Computing

Prerequisites: CS 07510 Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science plus Matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This course builds on the introduction to the theory of computing provided in the course Foundations of Computer
Science. It discusses finite automata, formal languages, Turing Machines, and computability theory at an advanced level.

END

CS 07631:

Computer Science Thesis II

Prerequisites: CS 07530

Students will follow their formal project specification developed in Computer Science Thesis I to research a specific area
of computer science or computer science education and produce a written thesis.

END

CS 07632:

Computer Science Thesis III

Prerequisites: CS 07530 AND CS 07631

Students will continue scholarly research that was being done in Computer Science Thesis II and produce a written thesis.

END

CS 07645:

Advanced Robotics

Prerequisites: CS 07540 Advanced Design and Analysis of Algorithms plus Matriculation in the MS in Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This course provides an introduction to the fundamentals of robotics. Students study robot manipulators and mobile
robots, robot sensors and robot cognition. Students will also gain experience programming in small groups, and
programming in a domain where noisy and imprecise data is commonplace. Familiarity with matrix multiplication and
inversion is expected for this course.

END

CS 07650:

Concepts In Artificial Intelligence

Prerequisites: CS 07540 Advanced Design and Analysis of Algorithms plus matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This course surveys methods for programming computers to behave intelligently. Topics include knowledge
representation methods, heuristic search, theorem-proving, puzzle-solving, game-playing, natural language processing, and
expert systems.

END

CS 07652:

Cryptographic Algorithms

Prerequisites: CS 07540 Advanced Design and Analysis of Algorithms plus matriculation in the MS in Computer Science program OR
the COGS in Cybersecurity Architecture or permission of the program coordinator

This graduate course examines the advanced topics in the field of cryptography. The course will introduce students to a
wide range of topics ranging from mathematical foundations to designing cryptographic algorithms. The topics covered in
the course will include the Data Encryption Standard (DES), Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), RSA cryptosystem,
ElGamal cryptosystem, elliptic curve cryptosystem, integrity, authentication and key management, cryptographic hash
functions, digital signatures, entity authentication, Kerberos, and others.

END

CS 07655:

Natural Language Processing

Prerequisites: CS 07540 Advanced Design and Analysis of Algorithms plus matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This course presents methods for allowing computers to understand and generate sentences in human languages (such as
English) and prepares the student to do research in natural language processing. Topics include syntax, semantics,
pragmatics, and knowledge representation.

END

CS 07656:

Machine Learning II

Prerequisites: CS 07556 Machine Learning I plus matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This course examines the mathematics and theory behind of some Machine Learning approaches, fundamental issues in
machine learning, basic learning theory, and recent topics in machine learning. Topics may include Learning problem,
Linear Models (Perceptron, Linear Regression, Logistic Regression), Support Machine Learning, Neural Network, Deep
Learning, Ensemble method, Theory of Generalization (VC-dimension, Bias and Variance), Regularization, Validation,
Dimension Reduction (Principal Component Analysis), and other recent topics in machine learning. This course builds on
the materials covered in CS 07556 Machine Learning I.

END

CS 08560:

Computer Graphics

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This is a graduate level course in Computer Graphics. Students will study the use and implementation of graphics
packages. Techniques and algorithms for implementing graphics systems will be covered. They include drawing of 2-D
primitives; 2- and 3-D transformation and viewing; representing curves and surfaces; hidden line and surface removal;
illumination and shading. Substantial programming projects on writing graphics applications and implementing graphics
algorithms will be assigned. Students are encouraged to devise new techniques, implement them, and determine their
effectiveness. Students will be required to complete in-depth assignments involving conference or journal papers from the
computer graphics literature.

END

CS 08680:

Computer Animation

Prerequisites: CS 08560 Computer Graphics plus matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This is a graduate level course in Computer Animation that takes a look at Computer Animation from a programmer's
perspective. It will investigate the theory, algorithms, and techniques for describing and programming motion for virtual 3D
worlds. Approaches that will be explored include keyframing systems, kinematics, motion of articulated figures, and
procedural and behavioral systems. Students will be required to complete in-depth assignments, read, summarize, and
present recent journal papers from the computer animation literature, and prepare term papers with regard to a computer
animation research topic. Students will also be required to specify, design, implement, and document a semester-long
software project related to computer animation.

END

CS 09510:

Computer Networks

Prerequisites: matriculation in the MS in Computer Scienceprogram OR the COGS in Networks OR the COGS in Cybersecurity Architecture or permission of the program coordinator

Students in this course study how computer networks work and why they have been designed as we know them. The course
covers descriptive material on network architectures and protocols, as well as network performance evaluation and protocol
implementation. The course topics include important examples of local, metropolitan and wide area networks; telephone,
cellular and wireless networks; the Internet; network security; and design tradeoffs in network systems and their
implementations.

END

CS 09605:

Wireless Networks And Systems

Prerequisites: CS 09510 Computer Networks plus matriculation in the MS in Computer Science program OR the COGS in Networks program OR permission of the program coordinator

This course prepares students to understand wireless networks and systems, and the underlying communications
technologies that make them possible. The course covers descriptive material on wireless communications technologies,
and important deployed and proposed networks and systems. Wireless system performance and Quality of Service
capabilities are addressed. Students will prepare and deliver technical presentations on state-of-the-art topics in wireless
networks and systems.

END

CS 09612:

Network Security

Prerequisites: CS 09510 Computer Networks plus Matriculation in the MS Computer Science program OR permission of the program coordinator

This is a graduate level course that covers the fundamentals of network security and cryptology. The course will cover such
topics as cryptographic systems necessary for security, public key infrastructure, principles of data integrity, authentication,
and key management, Internet architecture and TCP/IP protocol suite, application layer security, secure sockets layer and
transport layer security protocols, IPSec and distributed denial of service attacks. Students will prepare and deliver technical
presentations on state-of-the-art research topics in network security.

END

CS 09675:

TCP/IP And Internet Protocols And Technologies

Prerequisites: CS 09510 Computer Networks plus matriculation in the MS in Computer Science program OR the MS Cybersecurity program OR the COGS in Networks OR the COGS in Cybersecurity Architecture OR permission of the program

This is an advanced computer networking course that will expand students knowledge received in the Data
Communications and Networking course. This course will examine operation of the TCP/IP protocol as well as design and
architecture of the Internet. This course will cover such topics as: medium access protocols, address resolution protocols,
Internet routing, Internet Protocol (IP), Quality of Service, Transport Protocol, and congestion control mechanisms. This
course will also include selected topics on network security and network management. Students will prepare and deliver
technical presentations on state-of-the-art research topics in the Internet.

END

DA 01505:

Data Analytics Capstone Practicum

Prerequisites: Graduate standing or permission of the instructor.

This course provides a culminating experience for students graduating with an M.S. in Data Analytics. This course will
reinforce ethical awareness and good decision making in health-related situations and discuss the specific professional and
ethical responsibilities of the health data practitioner.

END

DA 03510:

Patient Data Understanding

Prerequisites: Graduate standing or permission of the instructor

In this course we focus on understanding the patient and other health-related data, including the various sources of data
and their commercial use. Furthermore, industry trends and developments related to health-related data will be researched
and tracked by the students.

END

DA 03511:

Patient Data Privacy & Ethics

Prerequisites: Graduate standing or permission of the instructor. 

In this course we focus on understanding privacy and ethical issues as they relate to patient and other health-related data, as 
well as to health information systems. Industry trends and developments will be researched and tracked by the students.

END

DS 02510:

Visual Analytics

Prerequisites: Graduate standing or permission of the instructor.

This is a graduate level course that investigates visual analytics tools and techniques used to synthesize information and
derive insight from massive, dynamic, ambiguous, and often conflicting data, and to communicate the findings effectively
for decision-making. Extensive use of case studies based on real-world events will be used to illustrate course concepts.
Students will be required to present recent conference or journal papers from the visual analytics literature and to apply
visual analytics techniques toward a focused research problem in a real-world application or a domain of interest.

END

DS 02695:

Advanced Topics in Data Science

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the MS in Data Science program or permission of the program coordinator

This course enables the faculty to offer courses in advanced topics in Data Science which are not offered on a regular basis.

END

DS 02799:

Doctoral Research and Dissertation

Prerequisites: Permission of Ph.D. Advisor

This variable-credit course Doctoral Research and Dissertation is a variable-credit independent study based research
course that is designed to provides the student necessary time and guidance to help him/her them achieve the
aforementioned goals. Students are expected to take the appropriate number of research credits each semester they are
materially involved with doctoral research, culminating with preparation, execution, and defense of the Dissertation. Each
section of this course is associated with a faculty member, and each student will take that section of this course that is
associated with his/her their Ph.D. Advisor, who will be guiding the student's doctoral research.

END

INTR 01265:

Computers and Society

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

END

CASE 90800:

Current Issues & Research in Access, Success, & Equity in Education

The purpose of this course is to provide students with an in-depth exploration of the current issues and research
surrounding access, success, and equity in P-20 contexts. Students will gain a broad understanding of issues related to the
current context of schools through an equity lens, understanding and operationalizing access, success, and equity;
understanding diverse populations, systemic inequities, reform efforts, and theoretical frameworks appropriate for studying
educational disparities. This course will provide students with relevant skills and understanding of current research, models,
and considerations for working with issues of access, success, and equity. The readings, discussions, and assignments are
intended to provide information for students aspiring to academic positions.

END

CASE 90801:

Research Seminar in Access, Success, & Equity

Prerequisites: CASE 90800

The purpose of this class is for students to develop as educational researchers. This course will facilitate the development
of doctoral students’ research ideas and build community among students and faculty. Under supervision, students will
engage in various stages of research activities and will learn how to effectively design, conduct, and disseminate results.

END

CASE 90802:

Internship in the Academic Profession and Professoriate for Promoting Student
Success

Prerequisites: CASE 90800

The purpose of this course is for students to develop as reflective and effective post-secondary educators. Under
supervision, students will teach or prepare to teach discipline specific courses while simultaneously reflecting on their
experiences of teaching adult students for equitable outcomes. Students will learn how to effectively design and implement
curricula, use effective instructional and technological strategies, use assessment to improve teaching, and formulate their
own personal philosophy of teaching.

END

CASE 90803:

Equity, Success, and Access Educational Research

Prerequisites: CASE 90801, CASE 90802.

This seminar is designed to support students approaching their third year in the preparation of dissertation proposal and to
facilitate the transition from coursework to dissertation. Students will learn about the dissertation process and develop a
plan for completing their dissertation. Each student will prepare a concept paper that frames their dissertation ideas, with
emphasis placed on the logical relations between elements. Course must be repeated.

END

CASE 90810:

Quantitative Research Methods in Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90800

This course provides an introduction to the examination of appropriate quantitative methods in applied educational
contexts. Students will learn data analysis strategies for education data with an emphasis on identification and interpretation
of findings.

END

CASE 90811:

Multivariate Research Methods in Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90810

The purpose of this course is to advance students’ statistical knowledge with multivariate statistical methods. The course
will highlight the implementation and interpretation of these methods. An emphasis will be placed on using statistical
methods that simultaneously analyze multiple measurements under investigation in an educational context.

END

CASE 90812:

Qualitative Research Methods in Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90800

This course introduces students to qualitative research as an approach to exploring and understanding problems of access,
success, and equity. This course is required of all PhD students because it lays the foundation to rigorous qualitative
empirical research. Beginning with questions of epistemology and an interrogation of competing paradigms, it supports the
goals of the program, college, and university by requiring students examine their stance as they undertake research in key
areas of access, success, and equity. At the completion of this course students will have fully conceptualized and carried out a
qualitative study and written a research paper that can be submitted to a conference.

END

CASE 90813:

Survey Methods in Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90811

The purpose of this course is for students to examine the major elements involved in planning, conducting, and reporting
survey research. An emphasis will be placed on the design, instrumentation, data analysis, and interpretation of survey
research.

END

CASE 90814:

Advanced Qualitative Research Methods in Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90812

This course emphasizes a critical interpretivist approach to qualitative inquiry. It examines critical approaches to research
by focusing on contemporary educational problems related to access, equity, and success. This course builds upon
Qualitative Research 1 through the exploration of strategies of inquiry, using qualitative data analysis software, and
presenting qualitative research.

END

CASE 90815:

Single Subject Study Design in Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90811

This course provides the students with a basic knowledge of the theoretical bases and methodological procedures of single
subject experimental designs. In this course, content includes variety of single subject research designs, procedures in single
subject research, and evaluation of single subject research findings applied in an educational context.

END

CASE 90816:

Mixed Methods Research Methods in Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90810, CASE 90812

This course is an advanced research seminar on approaches to integrating qualitative and quantitative approaches,
methods, and data in a single study. The course covers the assumptions and “mental models” that inform both approaches,
and the ways in which qualitative and quantitative goals, questions, methods, analysis strategies, and presentation styles can
be productively integrated.

END

CASE 90817:

Experimental Design Research Methods in Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90811

This course provides the students with a basic knowledge of the theoretical bases and methodological procedures of
experimental and quasi-experimental designs applied to educational problems involving access, equity, and success. Course
content includes experiments and generalized causal inference, statistical conclusions, validity & internal validity,
introduction to statistical power/design sensitivity, construct validity, and external validity, quasi-experimental designs,
interrupted time series designs, regression discontinuity designs, randomized experiments, and generalized causal inference
from single and multiple studies.

END

CASE 90820:

Advocacy, Leadership, and Professional Issues in Counselor Education

The purpose of this course is to provide advanced graduate student an orientation to counselor education with an
understanding of a variety of professional development issues (e.g., research, teaching, consultation, and service). Students
will acquire an in-depth understanding of ethical standards of the counseling profession and it application to counselor
practice and counselor education. Students will also acquire leadership theory, leadership practice, and advocacy knowledge
and skills to help further students, clients, and the counseling profession.

END

CASE 90821:

Advanced Practicum in Counseling for Equitable Career & College Readiness

Prerequisites: CASE 90820

This course provided advanced graduate students an opportunity to advance to demonstrate and develop counseling skills
specifically related to college and career readiness utilizing ethical and culturally relevant counseling practices.

END

CASE 90822:

Advanced Theories of Indiv & Group Coun for Academic, Soc/Emot, & Career Development

Prerequisites: CASE 90820

This course specifically provides students the opportunity to advance their individual and group counseling skills
specifically in the areas of academic, social/emotional, and career development. Students will increase their knowledge based
of theories, skills, evidence-based practices, and methods of evaluation counseling effectiveness in both individual and group
counseling.

END

CASE 90823:

Supervision in Counselor Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90821

The purpose of this course is to familiarize students with conceptual, ethical, and methodological issues regarding the
supervisory process in the counseling profession. Students will be able to develop and synthesize an ethical and culturally
relevant personal approach of implementing counselor supervision that can be applied to a present and/or future setting.

END

CASE 90824:

Adv Theories in Family & Systems Coun, Consul, & Comm Engagement for Ed
Access

This course specifically provides students the opportunity to advance their counseling knowledge, skills, and
evidence-based practices specifically in the areas of family and systems counseling, consultation, and community
engagement through the lens of educational access for all K-20 students.

END

CASE 90825:

Practicum in Supervision for Counselor Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90823

This course is intended to assist counselor education doctoral students to apply current supervision facts, concepts, and
research in a counseling practicum setting. Furthermore, the course will provide opportunities for experiential learning and
skill development in an applied supervisory setting and will enable students to synthesize a personal approach to counselor
supervision. This approach will develop out of an integration of knowledge (based on theory) and experience, which can
then be applied to a future work setting as a facilitating reflective practitioner.

END

CASE 90826:

Advanced Assessment & Program Evaluation Procedures in Counseling for Access,
Equity & Success

This course extends students’ knowledge of the theoretical basis for assessments and assessment techniques used in
different counseling settings through a social justice lens. Students will also take an in-depth look at methods of evaluating
counseling effectiveness, including the assessment methods used in course development and learn how to conduct program
evaluations of counselor education programs.

END

CASE 90830:

Introduction to Postsecondary Education

The purpose of this course is to provide students with an introduction to the research, theoretical, and practical issues
surrounding access to college and equity in postsecondary education institutions. Specifically, it aims to teach students to
think critically about access and equity issues related to racial/ethnic minority groups and socioeconomic status. Major
themes include: affirmative action, college choice, community colleges, financial aid.

END

CASE 90831:

Organizational Analysis & Administration of Postsecondary Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90830

This course introduces students to colleges and universities as large, complex organizational systems. Conceptual models
for understanding their structures, contexts, and interactions with the broader environment are explored. Major themes
include: organizational theory and analysis; the organizational and governance structures in postsecondary education;
different models in postsecondary education including two-year and four-year college, public and private colleges, and new
developments in the for-profit sector.

END

CASE 90832:

International & Comparative Higher Education

This course explores key constructs, theories, and issues in international higher education, using comparative techniques.
Students will explore contemporary educational problems related to access, equity, and success. Students will also consider
the complexities of globalization and international policy flows for the reform, practice, and organization of higher
education.

END

CASE 90833:

Public Policy & Analysis in Postsecondary Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90830

This course introduces students to the policy process affecting American postsecondary education. This course will
explore current policies that influence colleges and universities and their students. Specific policy topics including access,
equity, finance, and accountability policies in the postsecondary context.

END

CASE 90834:

Student Learning & Development: Impact of Postsecondary Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90830

The purpose of this course is to provide students with an in-depth exploration of the current theory and conceptual
frameworks utilized in research focused on students’ learning and development while in college and the impact of college on
learning and development. The course foci include: the methodology of studying college impact; conceptual models of
student development and the impact of college; learning and cognitive development; moral development; and conducting
research on educational attainment, career and economic benefits, and quality of post college life.

END

CASE 90835:

Theoretical and Conceptual Frameworks in Higher Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90830

The purpose of this course is to provide students with an in-depth exploration of the current theory and conceptual
frameworks utilized in research focused on issues of access, success, and equity in higher education settings. Students will
gain a broad understanding of issues related to understanding the role of theory and conceptual frameworks in research and
research design as well as operationalizing theoretical concepts in research design and data interpretation. Theoretical
approaches used in research examining inequality of access and success in higher education will be a focus of the course.
These theories include: Critical Theory; Critical Race Theory; Cultural Capital, Social Capital, and Habitus;
Status-Attainment; Human Capital; Funds of Knowledge; New Institution Theory; and Post-Structural Theory. This course
will provide students with relevant skills to understand and utilize theory in research on access, success, and equity.

END

CASE 90836:

Assessment & Evaluation in Postsecondary Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90830

This course introduces students to the process of program development, change, improvement and evaluation for
postsecondary education. It furthers’ students’ knowledge of the theoretical basis for assessment and evaluation. Students
will learn how to cultivate a culture of inquiry that uses data as an opportunity for exploring equity in programs and broader
organizational contexts and developing solutions to improve performance.

END

CASE 90840:

Theoretical Perspectives in the Study of Literacy

Prerequisites: Admittance to the PhD program (D800)

This course examines influential theories and research that address the broad and continually evolving knowledge-base in
literacy. Candidates analyze foundational and cutting edge studies in the field of literacy and consider how leading and often
competing reading theories developed over time as well as how seminal research studies were conducted and considered by
scholars, practitioners and policy makers. The course emphasizes the ways in which a personal belief system impacts a
theoretical orientation to practice and/or research. In addition, the course will focus on research propelling current
conversations in the literacy field. Topics explore how the definitions, purposes and practices of literacy often depend on
characteristics having to do with language, class, gender, print verses electronic text, and contextual considerations such as
in-school verses out-of-school settings or local verses federal policy.

END

CASE 90841:

Transliteracy and Translingualism

Prerequisites: CASE 90840

This course focuses on transliterate and translingual theories, pedagogies, and policies in K-12 classrooms. Candidates will
understand the history of literacy, and the inter-relationship of literacy, context, and culture. It explores how many
languages and the power of multiple languages comes into use to communicate and to gain access in a more global world.
The course also emphasizes research on current conversations in the field of printed literacy. Finally, students will be able to
define what it means to be trans-literate in the 21st century.

END

CASE 90842:

Multicultural & Multilingual Issues in Literacy Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90840

This course explores multicultural and multilingual issues in local and global educational and societal contexts. Being more
common than not, multilingualism exists across the globe in a variety of contexts; students will explore studies in both local
and global instances that demonstrate how people negotiate their multilingualism to achieve access and success. Students
will draw connections between local to global language issues, and how, at times, the issue is resolved in one context but not
the other. Finally, the course focuses on what research in multilingualism means for schools, classrooms, teachers, andteacher educators.

END

CASE 90843:

Literacy as Practice In & Outside of School

Prerequisites: CASE 90840

This course investigates literacy practices that occur in a range of institutions and social spaces with an interest in
expanding conceptions of what counts as literacy. This course introduces students to an array of theoretical frameworks
within which contemporary scholars define, study, and explain literate actions as simultaneously individual and collective.
These traditions include but are not limited to: critical literacy; socio-cultural theories; activity theory; ethnography of
communication; technologically mediated literacies; narrative theories. Tensions between school curriculums and students’
out-of-school literacy practices are discussed with emphasis on research as a means to transform school spaces, creating
greater success and equity.

END

CASE 90844:

First & Second Language Acquisition

Prerequisites: CASE 90840

This course examines the theoretical bases and research perspectives on second language acquisition and linguistic
diversity in the United States. This course will prepare doctoral students to be able to critically review theories and research
on first and second language acquisition and linguistic diversity, select appropriate assessments when conducting research in
the field, understand the unique features of second language acquisition that influence language and literacy development,
and identify the social and cultural contexts that influence language and literacy development and the success and equity of
school learning in general and how to account for this variance in research design.

END

CASE 90845:

The Pedagogy of Literature for Children & Adolescents

Prerequisites: CASE 90840

This course is an introduction that examines literature used in schools through literacy theories, children’s literature, and
empirical research that address current theoretical discussions. Candidates will be able to define what is children’s literature.
In addition, they will examine how literacy theory helps to understand children’s literature. They will also look at empirical
research on reader response and discover ways it informs pedagogy and creates greater equity in P-12 classrooms.

END

CASE 90846:

Sociolinguistics & Discourse Analysis in Literacy Studies

Prerequisites: CASE 90840

This is an in-depth study of language and literacy practices in its social context, especially educational contexts. The
courses emphasize how language and literacy practices produce an inequitable world, but also how language and literacy can
be used to change this inequity. The course will survey various research approaches in literacy studies, including linguistic
ethnography and discourse analysis. We will consider the underlying theories guiding these approaches and apply these to
data analysis in literacy contexts.

END

CASE 90850:

Access, Success & Equity in Special Education

This course focuses on historical and contemporary issues of access, success and equity in the field of special education.
Students will examine evolving changes in perceptions toward and services for individuals with exceptional learning needs.
In addition to investigating multiple contemporary issues in the field of special education, students will prepare an extensive
analysis of one current issue affecting individuals with exceptional learning needs and articulate implications that support
improved access, success and equity for all persons.

END

CASE 90851:

Research to Practice in Special Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90850

This course focuses on contemporary research methods and practices in special education. Students will examine how
research can change practice and what is needed in order to implement research-based findings in education settings.
Students will identify an area of research and prepare an extensive review of the literature thar illustrate the development of
this research and its impact on special educational practices as well as the impact on access, success, and equality for all
persons.

END

CASE 90852:

Program Evaluation & Planning in Special Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90850

This course will enable students to identify and develop effective models for evaluating the success of special education
programs, including their success in meeting the goal of access, success, and equity for all individuals. Students will study
evaluation approaches and formative and summative assessment models that contribute to program evaluation, with a focus
on developing a management/decision-oriented evaluation plan. A field experience is a mandatory component of this course.
The major course assignment will require students to develop an evaluation plan, complete the program evaluation in their
field placement, and report evaluation findings to stakeholders. This course serves as a practicum for the conceptualization
and development of a doctoral research study that employs a program evaluation model.

END

CASE 90853:

Leadership, Policy, & Ethics in Special Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90850

This course focuses on analysis of legislation, litigation, and administrative rulings related to special education. Students
will explore professional ethics and standards and build critical knowledge and skillsets for leadership at all levels of special
education. This course will provide and understanding of legally sound policies and procedures to ensure educationally
meaningful and legally correct education for students with disabilities.

END

CASE 90854:

Personnel Preparation & Effective Teaching in Special Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90850

In this course, students will explore current issues and research related to special education program design, curriculum
development, course delivery, and evaluation. Further, they will identify evidence-based practices of and develop skills in
professional learning, mentoring/coaching, and communities of practice for practitioners in special education and disability
services.

END

CASE 90855:

Evidence Based Practices in Special Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90850

The use of evidence-based practices is at the core of successful practice in special education. In this course, students will
examine the concept of evidence-based practice as it has evolved in fields such as medicine. They will also examine the
challenge of developing and using evidence-based practices in special education. Emerging technology-based practices will
be a focus of this course. Students will be challenged to apply their knowledge of cognitive and behavioral science, learning
theory, and instructional technologies to improve programs, services, and supports to ensure access, success, and equity for
all students.

END

CASE 90856:

Current Issues in Special Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90850

This course focuses on contemporary issues in the field of special education. Students will select one or two important
topics to study through research review, and lead discussions of the study with peers. Students are required to develop a
conference proposal and submit for a presentation. A grant application collaborating with the course instructor and other
students is also required.

END

CASE 90859:

Special Topics in Special Education

Prerequisites: CASE 90850

This special topics course allows PhD candidates in the Special Education specialization to explore timely content,
methodologies, and pedagogy that fills a gap in knowledge, skills, or interest. The topics are determined through
collaboration between students and specialization faculty based on student needs and interest.

END

CASE 90890:

Dissertation Research

Prerequisites: CASE 90803

This course is designed for students in the PhD in Education program who are completed with coursework. Students who
are working on the dissertation must enroll in this course. Students will take up to 21 credits total.

END

CASE 90543:

Structural, Cultural and Demographic Displacement in Urban Educational
Contexts

This course will examine the global forces that lead to migration and US immigration policy. Students will explore refugee
resettlement in urban contexts and how schools, in collaboration will community groups, refugee agencies, businesses, and
religious organizations, provide services to students who have experienced interrupted education, who may suffer from
physical and psychological disabilities due to conflict, or who may contend with insecurity at home and in the community.
Students will research the differential impact of gender, language, ethnicity, and race on access to quality education and the
innovations aimed at servicing displaced people in urban educational contexts. Finally, students will engage with diverse
cultural perspectives through interaction with local refugees and displaced persons.

END

CASE 90718:

Research Literature Analysis and Writing in Education

This course is designed to assist students in reading, interpreting, understanding and digesting research literature as well as
to assist students in basic academic writing skills and APA style. Students will learn the function of a literature review in the
research process and will learn to synthesize a body of research and write a cohesive literature review.

END

CASE 90818:

Introduction to Educational Research

This course is designed to provide students with an introduction to the epistemological foundations and principles of
research design in education. The research process is explored with the underlying assumption that educational research can
address critical questions and problems within the field of education. Course participants are expected to develop
knowledge and skills in the use of epistemological and theoretical frameworks; quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods
research methodologies; critiquing and evaluating research; and an understanding of their role as the researcher.

END

COUN 26501:

Introduction To Counseling And Guidance

This course provides a comprehensive, introductory overview of the profession of school counseling. It provides students
with the philosophical and historical perspectives that serve as a foundation for the school counseling profession. The
course also addresses current professional issues such as legislation, associations, certification, licensure, and accreditation.
In addition, information will be provided as to the diversity of roles, job outlook, and specializations within the counseling
field.

END

COUN 26509:

Group Counseling In Educational Settings

Emphasis is placed in the design, planning and facilitation of a group. The focus of the class is experiential whereby
students learn group facilitation skills while being part of a group process. The course covers basic skills for group leaders,
introducing, conducting and processing exercises, kinds of counseling and therapy groups, dealing with problem situations,
and multicultural considerations.

END

COUN 26520:

Design And Coordination of Developmental Counseling Programs

This course provides a thorough exploration of developmental counseling programs to meet students' academic,
social-emotional and career development needs. It also discusses how such programs are integral to school educational and
preventive programs including collaboration and consultation skills and substance awareness programming.

END

COUN 26523:

Counseling Interviewing Skills And Techniques

The course explores the nature of counseling and its relationships to theoretical concepts. The course also teaches
fundamental counseling skills such as relationship building, basic assessment, goal setting, selection of interventions, and
evaluation of client outcomes.

END

COUN 26524:

Assessment And Appraisal Procedures In Counseling In Educational Settings

An overview of formal and informal assessment and appraisal methods for evaluating student trends in academic,
behavioral, socio-emotional and career development and performance in educational settings (K-16). Topics include:
psychometric statistics, factors related to the assessment and evaluation of individuals, groups and special populations, case
conceptualization, assessment, and diagnosis. The processes of selection, administration, scoring, interpretation, and
reporting information from appraisal techniques are examined in relation to practical, legal, and ethical considerations.

END

COUN 26525:

Multicultural Counseling And Advocacy In Educational Settings

This course provides a thorough explanation of multicultural school counseling. It presents relevant skills in counseling
culturally diverse populations, as well as current theories and trends in multiculturalism as they relate to K-12 and
post-secondary educational settings. The course addresses current professional issues such as promoting academic
achievement and student retention among diverse student groups, working with culturally diverse families, and recognizing
cultural influences on student behavior.

END

COUN 26526:

Individual Counseling Procedures

Coverage of all major counseling theories is provided with an emphasis on developing one's personal counseling philosophy
and an integrative approach. Using assigned readings, discussion, and interactive counseling situations, students are
provided with opportunities to refine their counseling skills; the "theory to practice" approach is utilized.

END

COUN 26527:

Practicum In Counseling In Educational Settings

Prerequisites: (COUN 26526 Individual Counseling Procedures and COUN 26529 Counseling Interviewing Skills and Tech and COUNT 26501 Introduction to Counseling and Guidance.

The purpose of this course is to help each student develop effective individual counseling skills which can be used in a
multiplicity of settings. Students enrolled in this course will study and apply various contemporary theoretical approaches to
counseling through role playing and video taping tecnhiques. A field-based experience of 100 clock hours is required.

END

COUN 26540:

Post-Secondary and College Counseling

Prerequisites: COUN 26582

Through an equity, access, and success lens, this course explores the postsecondary planning and college admissions
process, including current issues confronting school counselors and students in exploration, application, and admissions
criteria for various types of colleges and college counseling for diverse student populations. The use of technology in the
postsecondary and college process will also be explored.

END

COUN 26550:

Introduction to Play Therapy

This course provides students with the philosophical basis for play therapy, including a review of the history of play
therapy, how to develop a relationship with a child, and an introduction to various theoretical applications and best
practices. Students will become familiar with play therapy micro-skills, the goals of play therapy, therapeutic stages and
themes, ethical issues, treatment planning in play therapy, and cross cultural/ diversity implications.

END

COUN 26582:

Career Counseling In Educational Settings

This course seeks to develop a conceptual framework of the career development process throughout the life span as well as
practical knowledge of the information system in counseling and career counseling procedures. The course covers the major
theories of career development, the structure of the world of work, testing and assessment, computer assisted career
guidance systems and systematic career development programming.

END

COUN 26597:

Intervention and Referral Services/School Teams and Community Resources

This course seeks to develop effective individual counseling skills which can be used in a multiplicity of settings such as
school counseling, student assistance coordination, and higher education advisement. Students enrolled in this course will
study and apply various contemporary theoretical approaches to counseling through direct supervision in educational and
applied settings. A field experience of 100 clock hours is required under the supervision of an appropriately credentialed
supervisor.

END

COUN 26601:

Internship In Counseling In Educational Settings

Prerequisites: COUN 26520 and COUN 26509and COUN 26526 and COUN 26501 and COUN 26527 and COUN 26582

Internship I in Counseling/Student Personnel Services is one of the culminating field-based experiences for matriculated
students taken during the final Fall semester of one's program. Students spend a minimum of 300 clock hours throughout
each semester at their selected internship site for a maximum of 600 clock hours in one academic year. Emphasis is placed
upon gaining direct experiences and actually participating in all phases of student services. Internship students work under
the direction of an on-site mentor, and a college-faculty supervisor. Internship students attend topical seminars on campus.

END

COUN 26603:

Research And Evaluation Procedures In Counseling In Educational Settings

Prerequisites: COUN 26520 and COUN 26509 and COUN 26526 and COUN 26501 and COUN 26527and COUN 26582

Research and Evaluation Procedures in Educational Settings will provide opportunities for students to conduct focused
inquiry and to generate knowledge around those factors germane to the field of counseling. During this course, students will
begin an action research thesis project focusing on school-counseling program reform, with emphasis on systems change
processes, needs assessment, goal setting, and data gathering processes.

END

COUN 26605:

Special Topics in Counseling in Educational Settings

This course is a series of three 1 Semester Hour seminars designed to explore and discuss current issues in counseling.
Selected topics include adventure learning, (ropes course), loss and bereavement, communicating for intimacy, and
existential thought and spirituality.

END

COUN 26606:

Ethics, Leadership, and Advocacy

Prerequisites: COUN 26501 and COUN 26523 and COUN 26526

This course will familiarize students and mental health professionals with the history and development of professional
ethics, standards, legal policies, case law, and implications for educational and community counseling settings.

END

COUN 26607:

Children and Adolescent Counseling in Schools and Communities

Prerequisites: COUN 26526 and COUN 26523

This course will consist of advanced counseling theories and advanced counseling skills and techniques with children and
adolescents. The emphasis will be on a multidimensional view of interventions with children and adolescents, giving specific
attention to developmental, cognitive, behavioral, educational, social, and environmental issues.

END

COUN 26608:

Diagnosis in Educational Setting

The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the etiology and classification of common mental disorders in
educational settings as defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5).
Students will learn to utilize diagnostic information to facilitate the initiation and implementation of the Multi-Tiered
Systems of Support and the collaboration with other education and healthcare professionals.

END

COUN 26650:

Mental Health Awareness and (Emotional) Crisis

The purpose of this course is to provide current educators, professionals, and administrators in P-12 and higher educational
settings with an overview of mental health, how behaviors may present in schools, learn individual and systemic educational
preventions and interventions, and explore policies and ways to handle crisis management within the context of emotional
safety.

END

COUN 26651:

Trauma Informed Practices for Social Emotional Development in Educational
Settings

The purpose of this course is to provide current educators, professionals, and administrators in P-12 and higher educational
settings with an overview of trauma informed practices that support the social emotional development of all students.
Students will explore the core tenants of social emotional development and how to address systemically, as well as through
individual classrooms and content areas.

END

COUN 26652:

Neurodiverse Learning and Social Emotional Development in Educational Settings

The course offers current educators, professionals, and administrators in P-12 and higher educational settings with an
overview of neurodiverse learners in educational settings and how to support their academic social emotional development.

END

COUN 26653:

Promoting Self-Care and Wellness in Educational and Professional Settings

This course will explore strategies to promote self-care and wellness for individuals and how to maintain wellness while
studying and/ or working in educational and professional settings. Additionally, this course will provide resources and
strategies for implementing wellness programming within the professional and educational context. This course will be
taught by trained educational counselors.

END

COUN 26654:

An Ecological Approach to Family and Systems Counseling in Educational Settings

Prerequisites: COUN 26526 and COUN 26523 and COUN 26501

This course provides students with the basis of ecological approaches to counseling and collaborating with families and
communities, including a review of the history and development of ecological and systems approaches, how to initiate and
develop working relationships with families/communities, and an introduction to various theoretical and practical
applications of family-school-community collaboration. Students will become familiar with systems thinking, as well as grasp
the counseling skills in relevance to working with families/communities. Ethical/legal issues, treatment planning, and cross
cultural/diversity implications will also be discussed.

END

CURR 29503:

Teaching Adult Learners

The general purpose of the course is to help participants become better instructors of adults. The course focuses on proven
methods and techniques for teaching adults in a variety of settings. Special attention will be paid to the individualizing
instruction process. Course participants will strengthen both theoretical and practical understandings of the adult learning
process, study methods and techniques for teaching adults, and critically reflect on their own instructional efforts.

END

CURR 29504:

Understanding Adult Learning And Development

The general purpose of the course is to introduce participants to the processes of adult development and learning. The
course examines the social, psychological, economic, and cultural dimensions of learning in adulthood as well as the
application of theory and research findings to adult learning situations. Special attention will be paid to the concept of
learning how to learn. Course participants will be invited to undergo a series of thinking style and learning style profile tests
and then analyze the results in an effort to improve learning performance.

END

EDAM 27505:

Selected Topics In Educational Leadership

This course explores one or more topics of importance in the field of educational leadership. The focus will be different
each time that the course is offered.

END

EDAM 27510:

Change For School Improvement

This advanced course in school leadership enables students to better understand the change process, further developing
their analytic skills for improving the teaching and learning process. This course is offered annually and includes a field
experience component.

END

EDAM 27521:

Introduction To The Principalship

The essence of school administration is the ability to supervise and manage the school organization, including its
personnel, resources, and operations. In this course, students learn and demonstrate the supervisory and management skills
necessary to use data-driven decision-making strategies to create an effective school culture and climate, supervise and
manage school personnel and plant, supervise the application of instructional and informational technology, supervise
scheduling and business procedures, and advocate for school resources among community and service agencies in ways that
give priority to student learning, safety and security, and curriculum and instruction. Effective communications skills are
emphasized.

END

EDAM 27525:

INDEP STUDY-ED LEADERSHIP

END

EDAM 27535:

School Finance And Records

Students learn and demonstrate the ability to develop budgets, apply principles of financial management, budget
management. Students study how schools are supported financially. This course includes a field experience component.

END

EDAM 27536:

Financial Accounting For School Systems

This course will provide students with the knowledge and skills required to initiate and maintain a school district
accounting program. The course will emphasize--but not be restricted to--the laws and procedures relative to New Jersey
school accounting. This course includes a field experience component.

END

EDAM 27538:

School Business Management

This course is designed to provide graduate students with an introduction to the skills, concepts, and insights necessary for
the school business administrators to manage, as members of the administrative team, increasingly complex schools to
obtain the greatest educational return for each tax dollar expended. This course includes a field experience component.

END

EDAM 27559:

Law And Ethics For School Leadership

Students study and understand and demonstrate the ability to identify legal issues involved in personnel administration,
school district government and operation, state aid, handicapped children and student rights. Includes a study of the legal
structure of the New Jersey school system.

END

EDAM 27600:

Practicum/Seminar In Administration/Supervision I

Prerequisites: EDSU 28546 and EDAM 27535 and EDSU 28510 and EDAM 27510 and CURR 29590 and EDAM 27521 and EDSU 28522 and EDST 24504 and EDAM 27559 and EDSU 28523

An administrative internship to reinforce and practice administrative and supervisory competencies, in cooperation with a
school district, is required. Students apply human relations skills, apply decision-making skills, articulate ethical beliefs and
values and apply various leadership theories. Students also demonstrate group process abilities such as shared
decision-making, group motivation, conflict resolution, and planning and conducting effective meetings. A project report is
required integrating research findings with selected field projects. Written and oral communication and community
relations skills are emphasized.

END

EDAM 27601:

Practicum/Seminar In Administration/Supervision II

Prerequisites: EDAM 27600

An administrative internship to reinforce and practice administrative and supervisory competencies, in cooperation with a
school district, is required. Students apply human relations skills, apply decision-making skills, articulate ethical beliefs and
values and apply various leadership theories. Students also demonstrate group process abilities such as shared
decision-making, group motivation, conflict resolution, and planning and conducting effective meetings. A project report is
required integrating research findings with selected field projects. Written and oral communication and community
relations skills are emphasized.

END

EDAM 27610:

Human Resources For School Systems

Analyzes the legal developments and trends in collective negotiations in the public sector. Topics to be developed are the
process of effective negotiations, organization rivalries, grievance procedures, the impasse and the comprehensive
agreement. This course may not be offered annually. It includes a field experience component.

END

EDAM 27620:

Legal Issues In Higher Education

This course examines the legal principles that guide the administration of higher education. Students will study current and
emerging legal issues in higher education, focusing primarily on student rights, student life, and general administration legal
concepts.

END

EDAM 27621:

Student Services In Higher Education

This course traces the historical development of student services and examines the philosophy and rationale for current
student services. Reflecting upon the demographic trends affecting higher education, students consider the extent to which
the nature, scope, and delivery of services should be changed to meet emerging needs.

END

EDAM 27622:

Planning And Resource Allocation In Higher Education

This course will teach students practical approaches to strategic and operational planning in higher education, as well as
how to develop budgets that are driven by institutional mission and that support the institutional plan.

END

EDAM 27623:

Diversity In Higher Education

The purpose of this course is to provide students with an in-depth exploraton of diverse populations on college campuses.
Students will utilize a broad view of diversity, including race, ethnicity, gender, religious and spiritual values, sexual
orientation, socioeconomic status, disability status, and age, as well as unique characteristics of various ethnic and cultural
groups that affect college students and campuses. This course will provide students with relevent skills and understanding of
current theories, models, and issues within diverse populations and community building on diverse campuses. The readings,
discussions, and assignments are intended to provide information for student affairs professionals, administrators, or faculty
members.

END

EDAM 27624:

College Admission And Transition

Prerequisites: HIED 06605 or EDAM 27737 or COUN 26526 or COUN 26520

This course provides an overview of admissions processes in higher education in the United States and incorporates service
learning to assist high school students' college search/application processes. Through the service learning experience,
students completing the course will have a fuller understanding of issues in admissions, including diversity and equity issues,
and how these issues affect students applying to colleges. The topics covered include the admission process, stratification in
postsecondary attendance patterns, college counseling, service learning, establishing and maintaining appropriaterelationships, as well as the role of reflection in service learning. Particular attention is paid to issues of campus diversity and
equitable access to postsecondary education. The readings, discussions, and assignments are intended to provide
information for student affairs professionals, school counselors, administrators, or faculty members. All students will be
required to complete a fingerprinting and background check process.

END

EDAM 27625:

Change In Higher Education

This course will focus on the change process both theoretically and practically. Each student will undertake an action research project 
that will serve as the basis for the thesis. A complete first draft of the thesis will be required by the end of this course.

END

EDAM 27628:

Seminar/Internship In Higher Education Administration I

This course is the first of a two course sequence which is intended to serve as the capstone experience for the M.A.
program in higher education. Students will utilize a workplace in a higher education setting as a laboratory to study the
application of higher education administrative theory to practice and to begin work on a major capstone research project.

END

EDAM 27629:

Seminar/Internship In Higher Education Administration II

This course is the second of a two course sequence which is intended to serve as the capstone experience for the M.A.
program in higher education. Students will utilize a workplace in a higher education setting as a laboratory to study the
application of higher education administrative theory to practice and to complete work on a major capstone research
project.

END

EDAM 27630:

Academic Advising in Higher Education

Prerequisites: None

The purpose of this course is to provide students with an in-depth exploration of academic advising on college campuses.
Students will gain a broad view of the role and function of academic advising. Specifically, students will learn about the
historical development of academic advising; the role of academic advising in the multiple academic settings (community
colleges, four year universities, special mission institutions); and how to assist students in planning their academic processes.
This course will provide students with relevant skills and understanding of current research, models, and considerations for
working with diverse and special populations. The readings, discussions, and assignments are intended to provide
information for student affairs professionals, administrators, or faculty members.

END

EDAM 27637:

Higher Education Administration

This course introduces students to the fundamentals of administration in the higher education setting. Topics include
authority and power, implementation of institutional policy, decision-making in higher education, conflict resolution, staff
supervision, and program assessment.

END

EDAM 27704:

Changing Organizations

This course focuses on the development of leadership skills that will provide students with the ability to implement change
in schools and colleges. Specific topics will involve students in the study of organizational and social change, intervention
theory, organizational design, group dynamics, interpersonal communication, and the use of self in leadership.

END

EDAM 27714:

Planning And Negotiating

This course teaches students to set organizational direction with specific goals and objectives to produce an integrated
system of decisions regarding strategies, sub-strategies, programs and budgets that will accomplish the goals of the
objectives. The course also focuses on the leadership role of creating mutual understanding and agreement among people
and groups who may have fundamental differences of opinion.

END

EDAM 27719:

Dissertation Seminar I

END

EDAM 27720:

Dissertation Seminar II

Prerequisites: EDAM 27719

This course is intended to assist students as they develop their dissertation proposal and prepare for the Benchmark II, the
dissertation proposal defense. Students will draft Chapters 1, 2, and 3 under the guidance of Educational Leadership Faculty
members.

END

EDAM 27733:

The Policy Environment

Educational leaders must understand the policy environment within which they operate in order to equip them to resolve
goal conflicts between education and its environment. This course teaches the skills to develop alternative choices to
advance education. Topics include economic, political/legal, social, and science/technology policy, as well as cross-cutting
issues such as entitlements, privatization, decentralization, deregulation, use of incentives, and funding of mandates.

END

EDAM 27735:

Promoting Effective Learning

In this course, students apply leadership skills through examination and analysis of learning and instruction in their school
contexts. The course focuses on examining learning theories, identifying the ways in which certain patterns of activity and
interaction promote learning, and applying theories to analyze learning environments. Students also use theoretical
perspectives to consider the impact of educational reform and to understand how other social, political, economic, legal, and
cultural factors can impact learning.

END

EDAM 27737:

The College Student: Issues And Support Programs

This course includes the study of student development and academic support in different types of institutions of higher
education. Emphasizing the role of the leader, the course studies the rationale, goals, objectives, policies and organizations
of selected programs of student services, as well as models for program development and assessment.

END

EDAM 27741:

Current Issues In Higher Education

This course will have a changing focus that will permit faculty to offer specialized seminars focusing on new developments
in the field, on issues of significance where advanced specialization would be helpful to educational leaders, on areas of
faculty research and scholarship, or in response to student requests. Multiple sections of this course, each focused on a
different topic, may be offered during a semester. Students may take this course for elective credit more than once, as long
as the theme of the course is different each time that the student enrolls.

END

EDAM 27742:

The Curriculum Of Higher Education

This course will examine differences of mission and resulting curricular offerings between types of higher education
institutions, external and internal influences that influence the curriculum, the components of curriculum, the curriculum
development process, appropriate strategies for curriculum assessment, and contemporary curricular issues.

END

EDAM 27746:

Higher Education Governance

This course will examine the layered approach to institutional governance, focusing on existing federal higher education
policy, the various models of state-level higher education coordination, the function of boards of trustees, and the process of
campus decision-making. Students will analyze the role of federal, state, county (if applicable), and campus policy-makers on
a specific campus program.

END

EDAM 27748:

Human Resource Development

This course focuses on improving the performance of the organization through a proactive human resource development
effort. It will stress the responsibility of leaders to assist staff through coaching, appraising performance, providing advice,
and eliminating barriers to development.

END

EDAM 27749:

Issues In School Governance

This course identifies current issues in school governance and provides students with the understanding of how the issue
develops, those instrumental in promoting the issue, and the ramifications that issue could have for the educational systems
and its leader. It will focus in part on the relationships among the educational leader, the school, and state-level authorities.
The course will help students to develop their understanding of the role of the educational leader as spokesperson seeking to
influence the resolution of issues of school governance.

END

EDAM 27750:

Applied Ethics Of Educational Leadership

This course will enable students to examine multiple ethical paradigms, to understand the Professional Code of Ethics for
educators, to determine one's own code of ethics, and to develop a model for ethical decision-making.

END

EDAM 27752:

Advanced Leadership

Prerequisites: minimum grade of B in EDST 24720

This course provides students enrolled in the doctoral program with a capstone seminar experience that is designed to
synthesize the various facets of leadership, organizations and change in a way that will enable students to view issues related
to these topics at a critical/deeper level of analysis while working on the dissertation. Specifically, students will be able to
formulate, articulate and design a method to study their personal theory of leadership in action. The course will place special
emphasis on issues of contemporary leadership in times of organizational and social turbulence.

END

EDAM 27780:

Community College Leadership And Governance

This course further develops topics taught in the overview course, The American Community College. It explores topics
introduced in the first course such as community college governance and leadership in greater depth, paying particular
attention to the governance activities that are the priority of community college presidents such as accountability,
accreditation, the role of the federal government, the State and the relationship with the county and the board of trustees.

END

EDAM 27781:

Community College Budgeting And Finance

Prerequisites: EDAM 27782 and EDAM 27780

This course will provide an overview of community college budgeting and finance. It will review the budgeting process in
New Jersey and the economic and policy context of budgeting decisions for New Jersey community colleges. There will be a
focus on recognizing the fiscal constraints in which community colleges function and the various sources of funding.
Students will also gain an understanding of how planning and budgeting processes are related. This course will be applied in
nature, drawing upon current community college budgets.

END

EDAM 27782:

The American Community College

This course provides an overview of the history of the American Community College movement and then examines
current issues in light of that history. In addition, the course explores the mission and work of community colleges including
current organizational, social, economic, educational, and political challenges and opportunities facing these uniquely
American institutions.

END

EDAM 27783:

Student Development And Adult Learning Theory

Students enrolled in this course will trace the historical foundations of student development theory and adult learning and
development theory in higher education with a focus on traditional student and non-traditional student populations. The
course will also provide students with models and techniques that guide the practice of student services administration.

END

EDAM 27784:

Introduction to the Community Colleges

This course is designed to introduce those new to the community college to its history and mission. In particular, it will
serve as an introduction to American community colleges and their leadership needs. Students will develop a basic
understanding of community colleges role in the postsecondary education sector, their organizational and governance
structures, and the current issues facing community colleges.

END

EDAM 27790:

Instructional Leadership And The Curriculum

This course provides students enrolled in the doctoral program with learning experiences related to Instructional
Leadership. Examining in depth the current "best practices," candidates will analyze the role of Instructional Leadership
and curriculum. Specifically, candidates will be able to align curriculum to standards, examine potential best practices, and
use assessment data to improve learning. The course will place special emphasis on how instructional leadership contributes
to student learning.

END

EDST 24501:

Procedures And Evaluation In Research

The course helps students develop an understanding of research and statistics sufficient to enable them to read and
evaluate research, and develop and carry out full scale research projects.

END

EDST 24503:

Quantitative Analysis In Educational Research

This introductory course is designed to assist educators in the design and implementation of research projects using
quantitative methods of analysis. Using a decidedly applied approach, educators will learn how to use computerized
statistical analysis programs in conducting quantitative data analyses. Further, they will learn how to compute and interpret
statistics of varying types, including t-tests, F tests, r tests, chi-square and other assorted parametric and non-parametric
tests of significance.

END

EDST 24504:

Action Research In Education

This introductory course introduces students to the cyclical and recursive approaches to action research. Students will
engage in reflective practice and will complete an action research project in an appropriate educational setting.

END

EDST 24707:

Applied Analysis For Educational Leadership

This is an intermediate course in quantitative (statistical) analysis with emphasis upon three broad areas: applying correct
statistical procedures for data analysis; using automated approaches to hypothetical testing and quantitative analysis, and
using intermediate-level statistical procedures in educational inquiry. The course is expected to provide practical knowledge
for use by educational leaders to support administrative decisions.

END

EDST 24709:

Issues In Survey Research

This course teaches methods for designing and implementing survey research, including how to choose a valid sample,
handcraft survey instrumentation, avoid non-response bias and other threats to the validity of the survey, and analyze and
communicate survey results validly and effectively.

END

EDST 24721:

Action Research In Educational Leadership

Prerequisites: Matriculation into the EducationalLeadership Doctoral Program

This course introduces doctoral students to the action research design. Students will identify a problem in practice,
research the problem, and then develop and implement an action research design methodology to address the problem.

END

EDST 24724:

Issues In Qualitative Analysis In Educational Research

This course assists the student in preparing an acceptable dissertation proposal. Topics include alternative approaches to
conducting dessertation research, designing an effective study, and recognizing and avoiding common difficulties
encountered in dissertation research.

END

EDST 24725:

Mixed Methods Research In Educational Leadership

Prerequisites: EDST 24721 and EDST 24724

This course introduces students to mixed methods research approaches in education, a contemporary approach to the
complex problems in the field of education today. Students will explore qualitative and quantitative methods and develop an
understanding of how to read, design, conduct, and synthesize mixed methods research. Students will also practice
understanding and evaluating data and research to support their decisions.

END

EDST 24795:

Dissertation Research

This is a 12 credit independent research project to be conducted in conformity with the student's dissertation proposal that
has been approved by the student's doctoral committee. Students may register for all 12 credits at once or may register in
four credit increments for three consecutive semesters including summer. Dissertations must be completed within three
years of passage of the second benchmark.

END

EDST 27801:

Leadership for Social Justice

The focus of this course is on preparing students to understand and address the plight of social and educational inequities
in educational settings. Student will critically analyze the historical perspective of inequities and the presence of systematic
structures and policies that maintain inequality in American schooling. Students will also engage in studying social justice
leadership paradigms that eradicates injustice and fosters inclusive learning environments.

END

EDST 27802:

Inquiry I: Theory to Practice

This course focuses on the application of theoretical and social justice frameworks to problems of practice. Students will
explore appropriate research designs for the investigation of individual-level problems of practice and apply relevant data
collection, analysis, and quality approaches to a problem within their sphere of influence and role. This course specifically
supports students’ application of a social justice framework to local problems of practice.

END

EDST 27803:

Reforming Organizations

Prerequisites: EDST 27801 AND EDST 27802

This course focuses on preparing students to become familiar with the foundational literature on organizations and
organizational change in order to work more effectively within organizations to improve social justice and equity. The
course will explore interdisciplinary conceptions of the organization, organizational theories, and organizational change.
This course supports students’ familiarity of the change process to prepare them to apply these ideas to program assessment
and evaluation within a social justice framework.

END

EDST 27804:

Inquiry II - Program Evaluation

Prerequisites: EDST 27801 AND EDST 27802 AND EDST 27803

This course focuses on preparing students to systematically collect and use data as part of the process of program
evaluation in order to improve social justice and equity. The course will explore appropriate research designs for the
investigation of program-level problems of practice and address relevant data collection, sampling, analysis, and quality
approaches. This course supports students' application of a change process to systematic inquiry for program improvement
within a social justice framework.

END

EDST 27805:

Public Policy, Ethics, and Contemporary Issues

Prerequisites: EDST 27801 AND EDST 27802 AND EDST 27803 AND EDST 27804

This course is designed to survey major policy issues facing educators in the 21st century. This course emphasizes how
federal and state educational policy plays a role in the local educational landscape, as well as the ethical implications of such
policies.

END

EDST 27806:

Inquiry III: Policy Inquiry, Analysis, and Entrepreneurship

Prerequisites: EDST 27801 AND EDST 27802 AND EDST 27803 AND EDST 27804 AND EDST 27805

The purpose of this course is to fundamentally empower students to engage in informed and systematic inquiry and
analysis of public policy in education as scholar-practitioners. The course seeks to enable students to identify problems of
practice and engage in policy inquiry that explores the roles of policy communities and networks in education. Finally, the
course will assist students in seeing their potential to influence policymaking and understand the importance of public
policy research to their roles as educational leaders.

END

EDST 27807:

Sustainable Institutional Change

Prerequisites: EDST 27801, EDST 27802, EDST 27803, EDST 27804, EDST 27805, and EDST 27806

This course builds on the work accomplished in Reforming Organizations (EDST 27803). It provides a framework for
students’ to continue to develop transformational leadership approaches that lead to sustainable organizational change.

END

EDST 27808:

Inquiry IV - Inquiry for Improvement

Prerequisites: EDST 27801 AND EDST 27802 AND EDST27803 AND EDST 27804 AND EDST 27805 AND EDST 27806
AND EDST 27807

This course first reviews improvement science and systems thinking approaches for organizational improvement and then
provides students opportunities to practice designing and testing a small-scale change at their workplace using the above
approaches to solve the problem of practice related to social justice, diversity, equity, and inclusion. Students will explore
appropriate research designs to measure outcomes and collect data, analyze the extent to which the change is related to
outcome variations, and propose necessary modifications in the small-scale change for a whole-scale implementation.

END

EDST 27809:

Introduction to Writing a Research Literature Review

Prerequisites: EDST 27804

This course is designed to assist students in reading, interpreting, understanding and digesting research literature as well as
to assist students in academic writing skills and APA style. Furthermore, students will learn the function of a literature
review in the research process and will learn to synthesize a body of research and write a cohesive literature review.
Specifically, the course has six objectives: familiarizing students with different research methodologies, approaches, and
paradigms; increasing students' ability to read and utilize research literature; increasing students' understanding of the role
of research literature in the research process; having students learn how to locate, read, and synthesize research literature
into a literature review; having students learn APA style; and improving students' academic writing skills.

END

EDST 27810:

Leader Scholar Community I

Prerequisites: EDST 27809

This course focuses on preparing the student to engage in the dissertation process in the Ed.D. in Educational Leadership.
The course will include understanding the purpose and role of the dissertation in the Ed.D., reviewing the different forms
the dissertation may take, the process of project conceptualization and development, and the importance of establishing a
networked community to facilitate student success. The course also seeks to assist students in transitioning into the
discourse community of our profession.

END

EDST 27811:

Leader Scholar Community II

Prerequisites: EDST 27809 and EDST 27810

This course continues to prepare students to engage in the dissertation process in the Ed.D. in Educational Leadership.
The course objectives will include understanding the purpose and role of the dissertation in the Ed.D., reviewing the
different forms the dissertation may take, the use of different research designs, and the importance of establishing a
networked community to facilitate student success. The course also seeks to assist students in identifying and developing an
appropriate research design for their dissertation.

END

EDST 27812:

Leading Scholar Community III

Prerequisites: EDST 27809 and EDST 27810 and EDST 27811

This course continues to prepare the student to engage in the dissertation process in the Ed.D. in Educational Leadership.
The course will include understanding the purpose and role of the dissertation in the Ed.D., reviewing the different forms
the dissertation may take, the use of different research designs, conceptualizing and framing students’ dissertation projects,
and the importance of establishing a networked community to facilitate student success. The course will guide students in
finalizing their topic, creating their conceptual framework, and making methods decisions for their dissertation study.

END

EDST 27820:

Educational Leadership for Equity and Diversity

This course teaches issues of diversity and equity within the student body and the workplace. This course presents
theoretical scholarship and practical strategies on how educational leaders might overcome the challenges in this regard.
Students will examine and question the structural, policies, practices and historical and contemporary conditions that create
and perpetuate a culture of inequity in existing structures. The course will stress the essential role that school leaders play in
ensuring the academic success of all children, regardless of race, ethnicity, gender, ability, sexual orientation, age, language,
religion, or socioeconomic status.

END

EDST 27821:

Instructional Leadership

This course introduces students to the processes of curriculum building and instructional design within a social justice
framework. It provides students a historical foundation of curriculum and an opportunity to analyze curriculum, identify
social justice issues, and design a change to address them. It also introduces students to the literature on learning sciences to
identify best instructional practices.

END

EDST 27822:

Equitable Finance and Budgeting

This course examines the issue of school funding gaps that persistently exist in the country. Students will learn histories of
school funding gaps from perspectives of equity, adequacy, and social justice and understand how these gaps lead to
systematic gaps in opportunities to learn and academic achievement. Students will study how to analyze and identify funding
gaps, make equitable resource allocation to narrow these gaps, and evaluate/assess its outcomes using a cost-effectiveness
analysis framework.

END

EDST 27823:

Building Board and Community Relationships

This course is designed to provide students with strategies necessary to engage stakeholders in the school community
including members of parent-teacher associations, local community organizations, parent organizations, and local school
board members. Specifically the course will address the school leader's role in influencing the school boards and other
educational associations. Additionally, students will develop strategic plans and public relation frameworks that foster
community engagement.

END

EDST 27830:

Curriculum Development and Instructional Design

Prerequisites: EDST 27801

This course addresses systematic ways of constructing and implementing curricula that meet the needs of nurse educators;
it further addresses instructional design that accounts for social justice issues.

END

EDST 27831:

Assessment and Evaluation for Nurse Educators

Prerequisites: EDST 27830

This course introduces nurse educators and leaders to the processes of assessment and evaluation in nursing education
within a social justice framework. The course addresses the following: general principles of assessment and evaluation in
nursing courses; aligning assessment and evaluation with the competencies for nurses laid out by professional organizations
(e.g., National League for Nursing); nurse educator skills in conducting assessments; conducting effective program
evaluations and consequent programmatic decision making.

END

EDST 27840:

History and Context of American Higher Education

This course is intended to provide a comprehensive introduction to American higher education for current and future
college and university leaders and administrators. Specifically, the course will provide students with an overview of historical
trends, traditions, policies, and current practices that both shape and impact American higher education as we know it
today.

END

EDST 27841:

Higher Education Governance and Leadership

This course provides fundamental knowledge about the various structures of governance in higher education and their
controversies. Students will gain an understanding of the roles of faculty, students, staff, administrators, governing boards,
and governmental agencies, as well as how funding impacts governance. Students in this course will also explore leadership
and governance.

END

EDST 27842:

Legal and Administrative Issues in Postsecondary Education

The purpose of this course is to provide students with an overview of contemporary legal and administrative issues that are
pertinent to postsecondary education institutions. It will provide students with relevant historical context and literature so
that they have a foundation understanding of these higher education issues. The course will enable students to have a better
understanding of how legislation affects how students, faculty, and administration function within public and private
institutions.

END

EDST 27843:

Leadership and Advocacy for Student Success

This course provides students with an understanding of the demographics of today’s college students and their diversity.
The course recognizes traditionally marginalized student groups and explores strategies for the success of all students.
Supporting today’s students also requires trauma-informed practice for college faculty and staff. The course addresses the
deliberate assessment and accountability for social justice that are necessary for the enactment of inclusive campuses.

END

EDST 27850:

History and Context of American Community Colleges

This course provides students with an overview of the community college sector, its origins, and its role in today’s
postsecondary landscape. The course introduces students to the multiple missions and stakeholders of this uniquely
American institution and as such, provides leaders with insights into its inherent tensions. It explores the social, economic,
and political context of public community colleges.

END

EDST 27851:

Community College Governance and Leadership

This course explores governance structures in public community colleges. Students will gain an understanding of the roles
of faculty, students, staff, administrators, governing boards, and governmental agencies, as well as how funding impacts
governance. The course will also explore the relationship between leadership and governance.

END

EDST 27852:

Legal and Administrative Issues in Community Colleges

This course provides students with an overview of contemporary legal and administrative issues pertinent to community
colleges. The course will familiarize students with the influence of legislation on how students, faculty, and administration
function in two year colleges. Finally, the course addresses current legal issues that today’s community college leaders must
understand.

END

EDST 27853:

Leadership and Advocacy for Community College Student Success

This course provides students with an understanding of the demographics of today’s community college students. The
course recognizes the role that community colleges play in providing access to higher education, particularly for traditionally
marginalized student groups and explores best practices and national initiatives promoting community college success.
Topics include community college student demographics and unique populations (e.g. commuter students and dual
enrollment students), student engagement and integration, and inclusive campuses for traditionally marginalized students.
Success is also considered in light of trauma-informed practice for community college faculty and staff. The course addresses
the unique assessment and accountability for social justice that are necessary for the enactment of inclusive campuses.

END

EDSU 28510:

Curriculum Design & Development for Instructional Leaders

This course provides instructional leaders with an understanding of curriculum design and development from the
perspective of Instructional leadership. Particular attention is focused on understanding various curriculum models, the
process of curricular articulation and coherence, the relationship between curriculum and Instructional leadership and
student outcomes as well as aligning curriculum with learning goals.

END

EDSU 28511:

Leading Curricular Implementation & Assessment for School Improvement

Prerequisites: EDSU 28510

This course provides instructional leaders with an understanding of curriculum implementation and assessment and the
tools to utilize the curriculum implementation and assessment process to improve schools and student learning outcomes.

END

EDSU 28522:

Instructional Leadership And Supervision

In this course, students focus on the knowledge, skills, and dispositions essential for instructional leadership and the
supervision of educational activities and programs. Topics include program planning, staff selection and mentoring,
curriculum development and evaluation, analyzing teaching and interpersonal supervisory strategies, collaborative program
development, practicing value-added leadership and supervision, reflective practice, understanding the need for diversity in
teaching and learning, and communication. This course also includes a field experience component of approximately 25
clock hours in which students apply theory to practice.

END

EDSU 28523:

Building Organizational Capacity

This advanced course in school leadership enables students to practice the cyclical and recursive approach to action
research. Students will engage in reflective practice and will complete an action research project in an appropriate
educational setting related to the teaching and learning process. This course is offered annually and includes a field
experience component.

END

EDSU 28546:

Educational Organizations And Leadership

In this course, students will demonstrate an understanding of organizational theory that underlies effective leadership and
supervisory behaviors in P-12 environments. Students will further demonstrate that they can analyze and supervise school
and programmatic activities, nurture and supervise a vision for improvement in teaching and learning, lead and supervise
change, support staff development, and use effective supervisory skills. Other topics include the history and philosophy of
school leadership and supervision, effective schools, effective teaching, and the future of school leadership and supervision.

END

EDSU 28602:

Field Service In Supervision: District Internship

This course is designed to respond to the needs of school administrators and supervisors for developing effective
supervisory skills. The content for each course offering will be determined after a local analysis of needs has been conducted.
Semester hour credit will be assigned prior to registration.

END

EDSU 28706:

Diversity And Educational Leadership

This course deals with diversity both among the student body and the workforce. It addresses the ways that people are
alike and explores issues of difference. It focuses on the power that valuing difference can have in establishing quality
interpersonal relations, in taking advantage of the cultural richness that can result from diversity, and in creating mutual
respect among groups. It examines how the educational leader might overcome resistance to change in this regard.

END

EDSU 28715:

Leadership Theory

This course is the foundation course for the Doctoral Program in Educational Leadership. Leadership will be defined,
demystified, and distinguished from management and administration. The roles and expectations of leaders will be explored,
and the competencies required for leadership will be identified. Issues of power, authority, and ethics are studied.

END

HIED 06603:

Seminar/Internship In Higher Education Instruction

The goal of this seminar is to prepare students to teach in a higher education setting in selected areas by engaging them in a
comprehensive instructional internship in a cooperating institution of higher education. The seminar will provide the
opportunity to explore best practices in instruction and to reflect on the internship experience.

END

HIED 06605:

Higher Education In America

This course focuses on issues and trends within higher education regarding institutional mission, the student body,
curriculum, faculty, student services, governance, administration, finance, and community service (including economic
development). The course will examine the challenges and opportunities confronting higher education.

END

HIED 06606:

Selected Topics In Higher Education

This course explores a topic of importance in the field of higher education. The focus will be different each time that the
course is offered. Examples of courses that might be offered include: Crisis Management, New Directions in Financial Aid;
Outcomes Assessment; Distance Learning; State Higher Education Systems; Federal Policy and Higher Education; Student
Activism.

END

HIED 06609:

Effective Teaching in Academic, Corporate, and Government Settings

The purpose of this course is to provide students with an in-depth exploration of effective teaching practices in academic,
corporate, and government settings. Students gain a broad view of the role and function of teaching and oral presentation, as
well as how to communicate effectively in these settings. Specifically, the course introduces instructional methods and
strategies, adult learning theory and implications for effective teaching, documenting and assessing student learning, and
how to improve instruction in academic, corporate, and government settings. Several real-world scenarios are discussed and
simulated, including preparing academic courses and corporate training packages, assessing audience background and
setting appropriate technical rigor and level, building classroom/meeting room/ presentation room management skills,
conflict avoidance and resolution in such settings, effective strategies for delivering technical content at meetings and
conferences, and answering audience questions that may be adversarial in nature. The course provides readings, discussions,
assignments, and most importantly ample opportunities for practice teaching, including a semester-long apprenticeship
with experienced faculty, allowing students to experience all aspects of teaching and classroom management.

END

HIED 06610:

Assessment and Evaluation in Health Professions Education

Prerequisites: CURR 29503 and EDAM 27742

This course introduces medical school faculty members and other health professionals to assessment and evaluation in
health profession education, including a focus on student learning outcomes and program evaluation to enhance the
curriculum. The ability to utilize data to make decisions on students' progress, on curricular alignment, on course and
program learning goals, and on improving student and programmatic outcomes are critical to the success of health
professions educators. Students will learn multiple approaches for assessment and evaluation, hot to operationalize learning
goals for effective assessment and evaluation, how to utilize multiple assessment tools and approaches, how to develop
assessment and evaluation plans, and how to utilize assessment and evaluation data in decision-making.

END

HIED 06611:

Applied Instructional Techniques and Practices

Prerequisites: HIED 06610

This course provides an opportunity for medical school faculty members and other health professionals to develop their
skills as master teachers by enganing in project-based demonstrations of their ability to create learning experiences for
diverse learners in multiple contexts, including large and small group sessions, clinical settings, and simulations. This course
synthesizes previous coursework from Teaching Adult Learners, The Curriculum of Higher Education, and Assessment and
Evaluation in Health Professions Education and provides opportunities to apply this knowledge.

END

HIED 06612:

Organizational Development: Understanding the Structure/Function/Cultures of
Health Organizations

Prerequisites: EDSU 28715

This course provides an opportunity for medical school faculty members and other health professionals to develop their
skills in organizational development as pertaining to health professions organizations. The course focuses on understanding
different models and functions of organizational structures. Additionally, the course includes a focus on understanding how
organizational cultures develop, and developing the ability to apply various models to promote organizational development.

END

HIED 06613:

Professional Development: Promoting a Culture of Continuous Improvement in
Hlth Organizations

Prerequisites: EDAM 28715, HIED 06612, EDAM 27625

This course introduces medical school faculty members and other health professionals to continuous improvements in
organization through mentorship and professional development in health professions education. The course builds on
earlier courses in leadership, change, and organizational development and engages students in understanding how leaders
promote continuous improvement through mentorship and professional development.

END

PSY 06628:

Individual Psychodiagnostics II

This course will focus on cognitive and educational assessment based on the Cattell-Horn-Carroll (CHC) theory of
intelligence. Administration and interpretation of the Stanford-Binet: Fifth Edition and the Woodcock-Johnson
Assessment Battery: Third Edition will be the course competencies. Special assessment issues covered will include
nondiscriminatory assessment, preschool assessment and the assessment of academic achievement, with particular emphasis
on the assessment process as a link to classroom cognitive and instructional intervention.

END

PSY 06632:

School Psychology: Consultation And Intervention

The course is designed to help students become familiar with alternative frameworks for educational delivery systems
including emerging skills in instructional and collaborative consultation, teaming strategies, curriculum based assessment
and measurement, and intervention strategies in the academic, behavior and social areas. Emphasis is placed in viewing the
problems children experience in schools from a systems or ecological perspective as opposed to residing within the child.
The role of the school psychologist will be enlarged to permit their effective participation in transdisciplinary school based
terms.

END

SNUR 92407:

School And Family Issues For Children With Ongoing Health Care Needs

This course explores various health care needs of the chronically ill school age child. There is an emphasis on the
importance of collaboration between home and health care providers. Family dynamics and legal issues are discussed and
resources are identified. The teacher's role in meeting both the educational and health care needs of children is stressed.

END

SNUR 92430:

Methods And Materials In Health Teaching For School Nurses

This course emphasizes the school nurse's expanding role as a classroom health teacher as well as a resource person to the
school staff. Discussions and experiences will center on theories of teaching and learning, planning for teaching, curriculum
development, the New Jersey Core Curriculum Content Standards (NJCCCS), teaching strategies, educational resources,
classroom management, assessment, and the integration of health teaching into varied school subjects. A K-12 classroom
experience is included to facilitate the integration of theory into the clinical practice.

END

SNUR 92444:

Practicum In School Nursing

Prerequisites: SNUR 92466

The purpose of this field experience is to provide an opportunity for the student to engage in a mentoring relationship with
an experienced, certified school nurse. The student will have the opportunity to observe and participate in the various roles,
functions, and activities of the school nurse. The course requires 50 hours of clinical experience with the school nurse
mentor. A University supervisor will visit the student in the field placement situation. Meetings of all students enrolled in
the Practicum are held periodically at the University's Glassboro campus.

END

SNUR 92445:

Internship In Health Teaching For School Nursing

Corequisites: SNUR 92448 Prerequisites: SNUR 92430 and SNUR 92466

The purpose of this field experience is to provide an opportunity for the student to utilize the NJ Comprehensive Health
Education and Physical Education Curriculum Framework and the NJ Core Curriculum Content Standards to teach health
classes in a classroom setting with an experienced, New Jersey certified teacher. The course incorporates the interaction
between the school nurse and the school counseling program, by utilizing school guidance counseling standards and
indicators. The course requires 10 hours of teacher observation prior to teaching 40 hours of health. A University supervisor
will visit the student in the employed or field placement situation. Meetings of all students enrolled in the Internship course
are held periodically at the University’s Glassboro Campus.

END

SNUR 92466:

School Health Services

School Health Services and functions of the school nurse within the organizing framework of the CDC's School Health
Model/Whole School, Whole Community, Whole Child are discussed, as well as specific roles to include that of the school
nurse within the comprehensive school counseling program. The interface between health services and nationally utilized
school guidance counseling standards and indicators is discussed. Fundamentals of substance abuse are included to provide a
basis of understanding with regard to the role of the school nurse including relevant information on best practices,
resources, and the referral process. Particular emphasis is placed on the role of code, regulation, and SHS policy, as well as
available resources relating to students, their families, and SHS personnel.

END

SNUR 92751:

Instructional Design & Curriculum Development In Nursing Education

Prerequisites: EDAM 27783

This course explores the developing role of the nurse as an educator and Instructional leader. The process from
institutional design, curriculum development, methodologies, strategies and outcomes will be emphasized to facilitate the
learning process.

END

SNUR 92752:

Nursing Program Evaluation & Information Resources

Prerequisites: EDAM 27783 and SNUR 92751

This course will explore how information technology and resources are transforming nursing education. The methodology
of evaluating comprehensive nursing programs within the context of core competencies, technology, standards, and
accreditation for quality management are reviewed.

END

SNUR 92753:

Practicum In Nursing Education

Prerequisites: EDAM 27783 and SNUR 92751and SNUR 92752

This practicum will provide the student with the opportunity to synthesize and apply acquired knowledge and skills in a
planned and guided teaching-learning environment through the mentorship process.

END

SPSY 06627:

Cognitive Assessment And Data-Based Decision Making

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the Educational Specialist Program in School Psychology or by permission of the Program Coordinator
or Course Instructor

This course will focus on an overview of theories of intelligence as well as the use, organization, and interpretation of
individual standardized tests. It will cover administration, scoring, and interpretation of individual intelligence tests, with
particular emphasis on assessment as a foundation for decision-making, identifying strengths and needs, and developing
evidence-based learning interventions for students.

END

SPSY 06628:

Psychoeducational Assessment And Data-Based Decision Making

Prerequisites: SPSY 06627

This course builds upon the knowledge and competence learned in previous graduate level school psychology assessment
courses. It will focus on the application of academic assessment methods, as well as interpretation and communication of
assessment results to inform eligibility for educational services and intervention support in accord to professional standards
and evidence-based practices. Assessment issues relevant to school psychology practice will be discussed.

END

SPSY 06629:

Behavioral-Social Assessment And Data-Based Decision Making

Prerequisites: SPSY 06628

This course will focus on an overview of norm-referenced and functional assessment of behavior using systematic and
data-based activities within a problem-solving model. This will include instruments and techniques for obtaining
information regarding behavior, affective, adaptive and social skills. There will be an emphasis on interpreting data from
multiple sources to achieve the goal of identifying strengths and needs, understanding problems and measuring progress.
Emphasis will be placed upon translating assessment results into evidence-based interventions and evaluating their outcome.

END

SPSY 06632:

School Psychology: Consultation, Collaboration and Intervention

Prerequisites: SPSY 06629

The course is designed to help students become familiar with alternative frameworks for educational delivery systems
including emerging skills in instructional and collaborative consultation, teaming strategies, curriculum based assessment
and measurement, and intervention strategies in the academic, behavior and social areas. Emphasis is placed in viewing the
problems children experience in schools from a systems or ecological perspective as opposed to residing within the child.
The role of the school psychologist will be enlarged to permit their effective participation in transdisciplinary school based
terms.

END

SPSY 08545:

Home/School/Community Collaboration

This course is designed to promote students' knowledge, skills and dispositions regarding positive home-school and
community collaborations. Topics include the study of families and schools as separate systems, ways in which family
systems, theory, diversity, and disabilities affect both a student's learning and behavior, and the families' relationships with
schools. The role of educational helping professionals and methods of collaboration between home, school, and community
that will facilitate effective comprehensive services will be examined.

END

SPSY 08547:

Professional School Psychology

The purpose of this course is to introduce students to current theory, research, practices and issues in school psychology
and to the code of ethics that guides the field. Particular emphases are conceptual, professional, legislative, legal and ethical
issues, and emerging problems in school psychology. Students will apply these issues to their own training and professional
development. The student will be introduced to the conceptualization of the school psychologist as a problem-solver who
links assessment to intervention and provides both direct and indirect psychological services.

END

SPSY 22600:

Applied Research Seminar I: School Psychology

This course will concentrate on the latest developments in the field of school psychology, emphasizing evidence-based
practice and research findings. Students will be expected to design an applied research project in the field of school
psychology. In addition, students will participate in a school-based field experience to directly observe the role of the school
psychology practitioner.

END

SPSY 22601:

Applied Research Seminar II: School Psychology

Prerequisites: SPSY 22600

This course will concentrate on the latest developments in the field of school psychology, emphasizing evidence-based
practice and research findings. Students will conduct an applied research project in the field of school psychology. In
addition, students will demonstrate their knowledge in school psychology through a comprehensive assessment.

END

SPSY 22623:

Internship In School Psychology

Prerequisites: SPSY 22630

The 3-credit course entitled 'Internship in School Psychology' is a 300-hour experience completed on a half-time school
week basis over four consecutive semesters in a school setting. Students are placed in approved sites for their internship
experience where they are supervised by an appropriately credentialed school psychologist. Interns receive at least one hour
of field-based supervision per week from a practicing school psychologist, who is responsible for no more than two interns at
any given time. Interns are expected to attend scheduled Internship classes on the Rowan University campus. To complete
the EdS in School Psychology and to be eligible for NJ Department of Education certification as a School Psychologist,
students must complete 12 credits of Internship in School Psychology totaling 1200 hours of field experience.

END

SPSY 22630:

Practicum In School Psychology

This course emphasizes psychoeducational assessment, intervention, and strategies for the student with special needs.
Practical experiences in psychoeducational assessment and consultation strategies with students are provided, as well as,
with staff and parents. Graduate students complete a 300-hour field experience within a public school setting during which
they provide assessment, consultation and counseling services to P-12 children. Instruction as well as supervision is provided
as part of this practicum experience.

END

SPSY 22634:

Internship In School Psychology

This is a full school year internship in School Psychology with placement in a public school. Monthly meetings will focus
on discussion of psychological diagnosis, educational remediations and research based upon consideration of case materials
related to externship experiences; review of current theoretical and experimental developments in school psychology.

END

SPSY 25516:

Applied Tests and Measurements

Emphasis is placed upon data-gathering, the evaluation of data and the use of data in educational measurement.
Standardized tests, both group and individual, will be studied.

END

ECE 09504:

Special Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering

This course covers timely topics in electrical and computer engineering related to engineering practice and/or research. It
is in fact a series of courses that constitute the emerging topics in electrical and computer engineering sequence. These
classes can be taken multiple times when approved by the advisor. Multiple sections of this course are offered during each
semester with different contents on emerging topics. The following courses have recently been taught in this class: Power
System Engineering; Computer Networks; Electronic Packaging; Nanotechnology; DSP Architectures; RF Design; Deep
Learning; Microwave systems; Smart Satellites and Internet of Things.

END

ECE 09509:

Virtual Reality Systems

Virtual Reality (VR) Systems covers the architecture a;nd design of current generation systems for creating 3D VR
environments. Topics included are application/hardware architecture, pipeline development, geometric transformations in a
3D coordinate system, geometry and pixel shading, lighting systems, texturing and VR development. Students will be
exposed to current VR technologies and next generation algorithms. As a graduate level course, students are expected to
gain a solid foundation in SLSL shader theory, advanced object oriented design techniques, pathfinding algorithms, and
apply these techniques to independent research experience to a problem of their choosing.

END

ECE 09510:

Advanced Alternate Energy Systems

This course will introduce the basics and current trends of the electric power system and electric power industry. Students
will learn methods to mathematically analyze different renewable electric energy systems and evaluate their performance,
economics, and sustainability. Specifically, key basics of wind and solar energy technologies, and their power grid integration
issues will be extensively discussed. Opensource software will also be introduced to the class to assist their study, such as
PVWatt from NREL. Other alternate energy sources, such as CHP, Microturbine, biomass, PHEV, Microgrid, etc. will
also be introduced. After finishing this course, students are expected to be able to conduct a critical analysis of national and
global energy systems. The advanced graduate level version of this course features a research project and presentation
component for graduate students to identify, research and present renewable energy integration technologies into modern
power systems that are relevant to this course.

END

ECE 09515:

Emerging Electricity Market

This course will provide ECE graduate students with a basic understanding of the power system restructuring, market
design, and pricing mechanisms in different physical and financial electricity markets. Rigorous mathematical formulation
and MATLAB based simulation will provide students with an in-depth understanding on the major differences between the
conventional regulated and the emerging restructured power system operation paradigms, and adequate training to solve the
different system operation problems. This course will feature a research project and presentation component for graduate
students in exploring current industry practices and challenges in electricity market operations.

END

ECE 09517:

Technologies Towards Green Energy Future

There is a transformational change in the electric power systems and electric power industry fueled by renewable “green”
energy sources. This introductory course will provide an overview of the fundamental technologies that enable this
transformation, starting with a review of the current energy sources for electricity generation, including natural gas, nuclear,
hydro, wind, solar, coal, and others. Continuously changing positions of these sources in the electric energy portfolios will be
discussed to illustrate the increased importance of renewable sources. There are, of course, significant challenges that
renewable energy faces, such as low efficiency/high-cost harvesting, uncertainty/intermittency of power output, as well as
system integration issues and their impacts. These challenges will be addressed via solutions using advanced controllers,
smart inverters, and energy storage technologies. Along the way, several key and fundamental concepts will be introduced,
such as power and energy calculation, instantaneous/average/active/reactive power, three-phase systems, power factor,
phasors, network equations, power quality, induction and synchronous machines, which will prepare students to subsequent
courses in this sequence. This course will also include hands-on design projects for harvesting renewable energy. The
Graduate level course will specifically emphasize an independent course project.

END

ECE 09518:

Wind Energy System Planning and Operation

Prerequisites: ECE 09517

Wind energy is one of the most critical green renewable energy sources in the U.S., with significant – and still yet
unrealized – potential for wind power capacity and generation across the nation. Realizing that potential requires financially
viable and physically feasible long-term planning, short-term operation, and real-time control of land-based and offshore
wind farms, which constitute the primary focus of this course. Specifically, this course will introduce HVAC (High Voltage
Alternating Current) and HVDC (High Voltage Direct Current) transmission technologies and compare them to
integrating wind energy projects into the power grid. Specific topics discussed in detail include generation system reliability
and cost analysis, coordinated generation system and transmission system planning, planning under changing market
environments, economic dispatch of wind energy systems, and optimal power flow with wind energy integration. Industrial
power system planning and operation tools aided by a set of hands-on labs that use industry-standard simulation systems
such as MATLAB/Simulink and Opal-RT will also be introduced. This Graduate level course will specifically emphasize an
independent course project.

END

ECE 09521:

Fundamentals of Systems Engineering

Systems Engineering is the interdisciplinary approach and means to enable the realization of today's complex, dynamic
products and systems. Individual products such as Cell phones, aircraft, automobiles, computers and even household
appliances are made up of parts developed by many people with varied skill sets, often working for different companies and
from remote locations. Other systems such as transportation, energy generation and distribution, medical, communications,
emergency response and similar are very complex as they are composed of many varieties of products and systems. Systems
Engineering is an integrating function that addresses all the disciplines and specialty groups resutling in a structured
development process that proceeds from concept to production to operation including maintenance & support, and
eventual disposal. Systems Engineering considers both the business and the technical needs, including environmental and
safety, of all customers with the goal of providing a quality product that meets the user needs. It focuses on defining
customer needs and required functionality early in the development cycle, documenting requirements, proceeding with
design synthesis and system validation while considering the complete problem that includes - operations, cost & schedule,
performance, training & support, sustainment, test, disposal, and manufacturing. The course is designed to expose the
student to the system engineering process to complement their technical skill set and to cover topics that are often not
covered in other classes. The course will include frequent guest lecturers who are practicing experts in the systems
engineering domain. The course will utilize the latest in processes and software tools from industry such as SysML modeling
and architectural documentation tools. Students will participate in a semester long project to gain hands-on experience with
the course concepts. This graduate level course will also provide opportunities for team management and cultivation of
leadership and communication skills.

END

ECE 09523:

Advanced Radar Systems

This course will provide an introduction to radar systems, range equation and radar signal processing techniques as well as
the nature of physical observables and propagators, the effects of the propagation medium on sensor performance, the
relationship between signals and noise, and the characteristics of critical sensor functions (including detection and tracking).
Radar subsystems will be studied, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, and signal processors. This will also feature a
project component for students to identify, research and present open problems that are relevant to radar systems.

END

ECE 09524:

Advanced War Gaming and C4ISR

This course will expose students to a comprehensive range of technologies that govern the effectiveness of our nation’s
ability to effectively conduct military operations. It focuses on material drawn from a working group of distinguished
thought leaders in critical technology and operations areas, thereby exposing students to the state-of-the-art thinking and
philosophies. The class material will be enhanced by the study of patents that relate to the subject which were issued to the
course instructor. This course will also include advanced topics such as C4ISR algorithms, and graduate students taking this
class will be expected to work on a course project involving implementation of important C4ISR algorithms.

END

ECE 09525:

Advanced Command and Control

Command and Control (C2) is defined as the exercise of authority and direction over assigned forces in order to
accomplish a mission. This course will embark on a study of C2 information processing and decision making in the context
of adaptive combat systems, as well as civilian and business examples. The course topics include the following: the history of
military C2, C2 decision processes (Observe-Orient-Decide-Act loops), problem sense making (Identification) and solution
finding and implementation processes, operational architectures, information fusion, control theory, mission success and
organizational fitness. The course will also feature a project component for which the students will identify research,
execute and present a solution to a problem that is relevant to course content.

END

ECE 09526:

Advanced Weapon Systems

This course will study system engineering principles in the weapon system components and will relate the principles used
in components such as prelaunch decision processing and missile in-flight control functionality to the robustness of the
overall combat system. Missile systems will be studies, including basic aerodynamics and propulsion. The engineering
principles discussed will be used to develop missile guidance laws and track filters to support a robust combat system design.
In addition to these, advanced topics such as track fusion and advanced guidance laws will be discussed, and graduate
students taking this class will be expected to complete a project which shows competence and understanding of these
advanced topics in addition to course requirements of the undergraduate version of this class.

END

ECE 09527:

Advanced Model Based Systems Engineering

This course is an extension of systems engineering by addressing the needs to better train and prepare students to use
model-based techniques to solve complex design problems. This multi-disciplinary class is designed to use a model-based
systems engineering approach to transform a set of customer needs, expectations, and constraints into a solution and to
support that solution throughout its lifecycle. Students will utilize SySML, a general-purpose modeling language, for
developing complex systems composed of hardware, software, information, personnel, procedures, and/or facilities.
Through the use of SySML students will gain an understanding of structural, behavioral, parametric, and requirements
models and their application. Students will also learn how these models can be used to inform other domain specific
activities or subordinate models.

END

ECE 09531:

Advanced Optical Fiber Communications

Prerequisites: Graduate Standing

This course provides a working knowledge of the components comprising fiber-optic networks and system design and
analysis of fiber-optic networks. The fiber-optic networks form the backbone of today’s communication networks,
including the global internet, 4G wireless, home access (e.g., FiOS), and data center networks. The operation of lasers,
optical fiber, optical modulator/demodulator, receivers, and optical routers will be discussed. The applications of
fiber-optics techniques, such as fiber to the home, the broadband wireless-optical interface, all-optical switching, broadband
analog signal processing and computing, and security in fibers, will be discussed. The graduate version of this course will
focus more on applications and experimental skills of optical fiber technologies. Students will have opportunities to access
and operate high-speed optical communication system from the research lab.

END

ECE 09536:

Systems On Chips: Design & Analysis

This course is intended for a cross-cutting exposition to the design principles involved in development of Systems on Chips
(SoC). The content taught in this course will enable graduate students to develop deployable hardware systems by discussing
the SoC components and prevalent ideas in superscalar computing. The graduate version of this course requires more
advanced project work in order to be approved by the course instructor and subsequently completed by the student.

END

ECE 09537:

Microsystems and Microfabrication

The STEM workforce for next-generation integrated circuits (‘chips’) will be a crucial component in regaining US
leadership in electronics manufacturing. Due to the immense cost of this technology at the fabrication stage, and the
otherwise limited access to chip making facilities in most areas of the US, few educational institutions will be able to
immerse students in the chip making process at the levels of sophistication current in industry. Therefore, new paradigms
and models for engineering education and dissemination will be needed to produce graduates in sufficient numbers who can
contribute to this national goal. This presents several opportunities. The first is development of new courses in novel
materials, fabrication, devices physics and design utilizing and exploiting nanotechnology, molecular electronics, organic
semiconductors, spintronics, and other emerging areas that can ‘leapfrog’ contemporary Silicon MOSFET technologies to
give the US a competitive advantage in the global electronics market. The second is to adapt existing courses to support and
enable modern electronics manufacturing in areas such as metrology, statistical process control, process modeling,simulation and control including image processing and analysis, machine learning, fuzzy logic, and artificial intelligence.
Students who gain expertise in these disciplines can play a crucial role in the CHIPS initiative.

END

ECE 09538:

Nanoelectronics, Nanophotonics and Nanotechnology

This course is an introduction, survey, and case study analysis of nanoscale materials and nanotechnology for electronics,
communication, and energy conversion, including nanodevices, processing, characterization, and applications. The course
will feature coordinated and themed focused studies of fundamental developments in novel materials at the nanoscale, and
their applications to computers, communication, data storage, and sensors. The objectives include familiarizing students
with nanoscale perspectives of materials science in the development materials with tailored properties and functions.
Applications areas include materials for structures, optics, electronics, processing, and biomedical diagnostics and
therapeutics. Topics related to commercialization and intellectual property, as well as environmental, safety, and regulatory
issues will also be discussed. This graduate level course will also provide the opportunity for students to explore additional
and emerging topics in nanoelectronics.

END

ECE 09551:

Advanced Digital Signal Processing

Prerequisites: ECE 09351

This is a graduate level course in digital signal processing (DSP), whose applications include analysis, compression,
recognition and processing of all telecommunications, audio – visual, biomedical, financial, energy demand and
consumption, seismic/tectonic/oceanographic data, among many other countless systems possible. The primary goal of this
class is to introduce advanced topics in signal processing and filter design approaches that allow analysis of real-world signals
that cannot be easily analyzed by the basic approaches discussed in the undergraduate level DSP course. Such signals include
non-stationary signals with time-varying spectra as well as those scenarios where signal and noise spectra overlap. The
specific topics that will be discussed in this class include advanced filter design and implementation approaches, filter banks,
analysis of random signals and spectral estimation, analysis of non-stationary signals using short-time Fourier transforms and
wavelet transforms, optimal and adaptive filters, and signal separation techniques such as independent components analysis.
This is an applied class and will feature several real-world projects.

END

ECE 09552:

Digital Image Processing

Digital image processing covers the analysis and contemporaneous applications of the enhancement, restoration,
compression and recognition of monochromatic images. Both classical and state-of-the-art algorithms will be employed in
conjunction with appropriate software for analyzing real-world images.

END

ECE 09553:

Digital Speech Processing

This course covers the fundamentals of digital speech signals and processing and simultaneously stresses real-life
engineering aspects from a systems perspective. An overview of the different branches of speech processing are covered,
namely, speech production, vocal tract modeling, speech coding, speech recognition, speaker recognition and speech
synthesis. The building blocks of such applications, namely, linear predictive analysis and quantization (scalar and vector) are
taught.

END

ECE 09554:

Theory and Engineering Applications of Wavelets

The theory of wavelets gave rise to a substantial number of applications in many areas including various fields of
engineering, making it one of the most popular research areas of all times. In this class, the theory of wavelets will be
carefully developed from the ground up, with an emphasis on engineering applications. Starting with a review of Fourier
based signal analysis methods, short time Fourier transform, continuous wavelet transform, discrete wavelet transform, fast
wavelet algorithms, wavelet packets, wavelet networks will be discussed. Applications of wavelets such as image and audio
compression, biological signal analysis, feature detection, signal denoising will also be explored.

END

ECE 09555:

Machine Learning

This class will introduce a broad spectrum of pattern recognition algorithms along with various statistical data analysis and
optimization procedures that are commonly used in such algorithms. Although mathematically intensive, pattern
recognition is nevertheless a very application driven field. This class will therefore cover both theoretical and practical
aspects of pattern recognition. The topics discussed will include Bayes decision theory for optimum classifiers, parametric
and nonparametric densityestimation techniques, discriminant analysis, basic optimization techniques, introduction to
basic neural network structures, and unsupervised clustering techniques. As a graduate level course, several advanced and
contemporary topics will also be covered, including fuzzy inference systems, support vector machines, adaptive resonance
theory, incremental learning and online learning and particle swarm optimization. Students will be expected to conduct
independent research for possible publications, as part of the class project.

END

ECE 09556:

Advanced Embedded Software Design

Prerequisites: ECE 09342

Embedded systems dramatically enhance our lives and are prolific in our everyday life. It is not uncommon for Americans
to come in contact with over one hundred embedded systems each day. With billions of embedded systems, being produced
each year there is a huge need for engineers who can create good embedded software. This course focuses on embedded
software for applications running directly on an embedded processor without an operating system. A brief survey of
microcontroller technologies will be covered but the class will focus on ARM microcontrollers and the embedded
peripherals available on such devices. Advanced embedded communications technologies (CAN, WiFi, Bluetooth, ZigBee,
etc.) will be surveyed and at least one implemented during the course. A great emphasis will be put on good programming
practices and design patterns which support working in larger groups. Additionally, students will learn project management
skills and will be required to manage a team of undergraduate engineers to accomplish a real world embedded system
project.

END

ECE 09557:

Advanced Biometric Systems

Biometrics is the science of recognizing and authenticating people using their physiological and/or behavioral
characteristics. By using biometrics, it is possible to establish an identity based on “who you are”, rather than by “what you
possess” (e.g., an ID card) or “what you remember” (e.g., a password). Interest in biometrics has increased significantly with a
global market that is experiencing very rapid growth. Border and immigration control, restricted access to facilities and
information systems, cybersecurity, crime investigations and forensic analysis are just a few of the primary application areas
of biometrics used by commercial, government and law enforcement agencies. There is much research interest in different
biometric systems with the main issues being high performance, ease of use and implementation, low cost and high user
acceptance. This course involves the study and design of various biometric systems (fingerprints, voice, face, iris and other
modalities). Multibiometric systems are also covered. This includes feature fusion, classifier fusion and systems that use two
or more biometric modalities. Biometric system performance and issues related to the security, ethics and privacy aspects of
these systems will also be addressed. Course principles are reinforced by a significant project or research experience.

END

ECE 09558:

Reinforcement Learning

Reinforcement Learning course will provide solid foundations for tackling advanced reinforcement learning problems.
Students will learn about the core challenges and approaches in RL. Through a combination of lectures, projects, and
written and coding assignments, students will become well versed in key ideas and techniques for RL. The course will
introduce fundamental concepts of RL, including Markov Decision and Reward Processes, Dynamic Programming,
Model-Free Learning, Temporal Difference, Monte Carlo search, on-policy control, off-policy methods, and policy gradient
methods. Class assignments will include implementation of basic as well as advanced RL algorithms using TensorFlow
topics. Besides, students will advance their understanding and the field of RL through a final project again using TensorFlow
libraries. An essential component of the project will be a written report on the lines of a research paper (preferably IEEE
Conference style).

END

ECE 09560:

Artificial Neural Networks

This course will provide a theoretical and practical foundation of neural networks for machine learning. Students will learn
about the core challenges and approaches in neural networks. Through a combination of lectures, projects, and written and
coding assignments, students will become well versed in key ideas and techniques for neural networks. The course will
introduce multi-layer perceptrons, convolutional neural networks, recurrent neural networks, generative learning, generative
adversarial networks, topics in gradient-based optimization, and applications of neural networks. Class assignments will
include the implementation of neural networks using Python. As a graduate-level course, the project will be a written report
along the lines of a research paper.

END

ECE 09566:

Advanced Topics in Systems, Devices, and Algorithms in Bioinformatics

Prerequisites: None

Bioinformatics is the field of applying computational techniques, from mathematics, statistics, and machine learning to the
vast amounts of biological - but most specifically genomic - data. While some refer to bioinformatics only in the context of
collection, storage, organization and access of such biological data within large databases, this course's view of
bioinformatics will include - in fact focus on - systems and devices that generate such data, and development of
methodologies and models to analyze the vast quantities of data generated by such systems and devices. The course will
provide basic biological background of genomics, will introduce the students to commonly used bioinformatics databases
and computational tools (such as search, alignment, and protein visualization tools) used to analyze genomic data from such
databases. The focus of the course will be on basic bioinformatics systems and devices, such as high throughput next
generation sequencers and gene chips, followed by an in-depth discussion on the theory of basic genomic signal processing
and computational intelligence techniques used in bioinformatics, including hidden Markov models and optimization
algorithms for sequence alignment and gene prediction, clustering and classification algorithms. This course will also
provide students with a mechanism to conduct independent research to advance the field through development of novel
algorithms and approaches.

END

ECE 09568:

Discrete Event Systems

Prerequisites: ECE Majors: ECE 09243 Non ECE Majors: Permission of Instructor

This course introduces fundamentals of discrete event system models and their applications in modeling, control, analysis, validation, 
simulation, and performance evaluation of computer systems, hardware/software co-design, manufacturing/de-manufacturing processes, 
communication networks, and transportation, etc. The mathematical and graphical models include graphs, finite state machine, Petri Nets, 
timed models, stochastic timed models, and Markov chains, etc. As a graduate level course, it also provides students with a mechanism to conduct independent research on
advanced and contemporary DES topics, including higher-level Petri Nets, finite automata based supervisory control, and Petri Nets in job shop scheduling, etc. 
and to develop novel models and algorithms for DES.

END

ECE 09569:

System-On-Chip Verification

Prerequisites: ECE Majors: ECE 09243 Non ECE majors: Permission of Instructor

This course introduces students to a variety of state-of-the-art hardware design verification methods, including traditional
functional simulation, assertion-based verification and a subset of formal verification techniques. Topics covered include
functional simulation, coverage metrics, testbench design and automation, assertion-based verification, and property
specification language (PSL). As a graduate level course, students are expected to gain a solid foundation in current, practical
chip verification techniques, underlying theory, and significant independent research experience applying the techniques,
particularly formal verification methods, to a real problem of their own choice.

END

ECE 09571:

Instrumentation

Elements of instrumentation systems are treated including transducers, signal conditioning, and signal processing.
Elements of modern instrumentation systems including standards (IEEE-488, SCPI) and smart sensors are considered.

END

ECE 09572:

Advanced Smart Grid

Prerequisites: ECE 09342 and ECE 09321

The ways in which electricity is generated, transmitted, distributed, stored, and used, are the subject of revolutionary and
evolutionary changes compared to the electricity grid we have today. Smart Grid goals include the improvement of grid
reliability, reduction in outages, faster return on service, ability to integrate a broad range of renewable energy sources, and
to include customers in the ability to effect load decisions based on grid demand and energy pricing. This course will address
grid fundamentals, tools and technologies, and then address major Smart Grid subsystems including conventional and
alternative generation, storage technologies, transmission and distribution systems, standards, demand management,
real-time pricing, grid stability, control technologies, measurement including Smart Sensors and Advanced Metering
Infrastructure (AMI). Physical and cyber vulnerabilities will also be addressed. The course will include a project to reinforce
Smart Grid elements.

END

ECE 09573:

Advanced Smart Sensors

Prerequisites: ECE 09342 AND ECE 09311 AND ECE 09321

Elements of Smart Sensors and Smart Sensor systems are treated. Instrumentation fundamentals covered include
transducers, signal conditioning, and data acquisition, communication, along with important considerations and associated
standards. Relationship of smart sensors to integrated system health monitoring (ISHM) and similar Intelligent Sensor
applications are addressed. The course will include a project to reinforce Smart Sensor elements and provide opportunities
for research in the field.

END

ECE 09580:

Internet of Things

Internet of Things (IoT) is a network of connected devices with sensing, processing and actuating capabilities. These
devices play an increasingly important role, and in fact control many of aspects of our daily lives. IOT devices are commonly
used in home automation, automotive, security, communications and seemingly endless list of other applications. This
course provides a comprehensive review of IoT devices including their hardware architectures, communication protocols,
power requirements and other important aspects of the IoT infrastructure. Specific topics discussed in this course include
IoT wireless communications protocols that provide low power, low bandwidth, low cost specifications that enable small
sensing devices to transmit data over long distances and obstacles while running on battery power for many years. This
course covers aspects of RF, sensor hardware, data transmission, network layout, and a brief introduction to data receiving
applications. This graduate level course will also include additional emerging topics, as well as a major project component,
allowing the students to implement various concepts discussed in the class.

END

ECE 09582:

Advanced Memristors and Nanoelectronic VLSI

This course is an advanced course in the extension of analog/digital electronic systems, dealing with CMOS devices and
emerging nanoelectronic devices and technologies. Since the importance of emerging nano systems goes beyond traditional
circuit theory and EE in general, this course aims to provide students with an opportunity of understanding the fundamental
concepts of a set of emerging nanodevices, with particular emphases on memristors and memristive systems, and their
potential applications and impacts on the next generation VLSI systems. The course will also emphasize hands-on
programming and application to examples as an important means to understand and benefit from the material. Software
tools such as Matlab/SPICE/Cadence will be extensively used throughout the learning and design experiments.

END

ECE 09585:

Advanced Engineering Cyber Security

Prerequisites: Graduate standing

This course addresses the need to better prepare students for the expansion in the Internet of Things (IoT) by imparting
fundamental concepts and capabilities in the management of cyber security. Cyber security is key to developing large-scale,
wide-area systems, which can provide the degree of security required to further implementation of highly-vulnerable,
highly-visible systems such as the Smart Grid. To gain this understanding, the course addresses a number of key
components: standards including network and encryption techniques (RSA, etc.) and security processes, methods of cyber
attach, and some methods of software and hardware security enhancement. COurse principles are reinforced by a significant
project or research expereince.

END

ECE 09586:

Advanced Portable Platform Development

Prerequisites: ECE 09243

The total number of Android and iOS devices is estimated to be over 1.6 billion devices (2013) and continues to grow. The
ubiquitous nature of these devices means they are now the default choice of platforms for hardware and software developers.
This course details the ARM core architectures, which underpin the majority of mobile devices, along with the basic
operating system and application software environments. Principles of effective app development using available SDK tools
and project management techniques are presented. Methodologies for performance analysis are treated. The hardware vs.
software trade space will also be considered. The course content is reinforced with a significant development project.

END

ECE 09587:

IoT Hardware Engineering and Security

Internet of Things (IoT), a network that connects "smart" devices with sensing and processing capabilities to other similar
devices and to humans, is growing rapidly and controls many aspects of our daily lives. Today, IoT devices can be found not
only in a broad spectrum of daily use applications such as home automation and security, home appliances, and automotive
industry, but also in critical infrastructure such as power and energy systems, healthcare and medical devices, as well as
military systems. As the use of IoT devices grow rapidly, so does the vulnerability of the systems that rely on them against
malicious attacks. This course will cover many aspects of IoT with a focus on security hardening primarily with respect to
IoT hardware, as well as software function and operation. This course will provide a deeper understanding of the
engineering behind IoT embedded systems and insight into security hardening of IoT hardware as it relates to IoT
architectures, firmware, and application software. The course will discuss asset management and top security challenges,
including but not limited to the lack of compliance within various IoT original equipment manufacturers, the lack of user
knowledge and awareness and the consequential lack of update management and challenges of hardening assets. The course
will also discuss the vulnerability of IoT architectures to various attacker types, attack vectors, and rogue IoT devices, as
well as known and potential defensive mechanisms to mitigate that vulnerability. This graduate course will also include IoT
asset hardening and assessment, as well as additional project opportunities.

END

ECE 09588:

Cloud Hardware Architecture and Security

An increasing number of software applications are no longer installed in the end-user's machine. Rather these software
applications reside in - and accessed from - the cloud, a term loosely represents the internet, but more specifically refers to
the software developer's servers. Such an arrangement relieves the end user from the need to invest in expensive hardware
that is possibly under or over specified for the application needed. However, using the cloud comes at a different cost:
concern over speed, access and - most importantly - security. This course will provide the essential background needed to
understand cloud hardware infrastructure, with a focus on architectures needed to protect and secure critical information
technology (IT), operational technology (OT), and other high value technology assets, whether on-premise or in the cloud.
The course will also discuss securing data and mission-critical applications in the cloud using secure architectures, from
building respective architectures for each impact level (IL) and on obtaining approvals within respective industry
compliance regulations. This graduate level course will also discuss emerging topics and will provide additional project
opportunities.

END

ECE 09590:

Advanced Emerging Topics in Computer Engineering

Prerequisites: Determined by the nature of the course content when it is announced.

This course covers special topics in emerging areas of Computer Engineering such as Computer Networks, Mobile
Robotics, and Embedded Systems.

END

ECE 09595:

Advanced Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence, Machine Learning and
Data Mining

Prerequisites: Determined by the nature of the course content when it is announced.

As the amount of data we generate grow astronomically, so does the need for approaches, algorithms, techniques and the
hardware that can be used for effective processing, storing, and analysis of such massive volumes of data. Computational
intelligence, machine learning and data mining all deal with automated analysis of large volumes of data in search of known
or hidden structures, patterns and information. While well-established approaches that now form the foundations of these
topics are discussed in other specifically named courses, this graduate level course will provide an advanced treatment of
emerging topics - fueled by rapid growth of research and development in these areas - but that have not yet reached the
mainstream textbooks. Hence, due to its very nature, the specific content of this class will be diffrent every time it is
offered, focusing on the most recent developments in these areas. Graduate students taking this class will be expected tocomplete a project on a class related emerging topic of their interest.

END

ECE 09651:

Estimation and Detection Theory

Prerequisites: ECE 09430

Modern estimation and detection theories can be found at the heart of many engineering systems including radar, sonar,
speech, image analysis, biomedicine, communications, control and seismology. All these systems share the common problem
of needing to estimate the values of a group of parameters or being able to decide when an event of interest occurs and then
to determine more information about that event. In radar, we are interested in determining the position of an aircraft, as for
example, in airport surveillance radar. The task of information extraction is the subject of estimation theory; and the task of
decision making is the subject of detection theory. The course will showcase numerous examples that illustrate and apply
the theory to current problems of interest in engineering.

END

ECE 09655:

Advanced Computational Intelligence and Machine Learning

Prerequisites: ECE 09.455 or ECE 09.555 or ECE 09454 orECE 09.560 or CS 07.556

Computational Intelligence and Machine Learning deal with automated classification, identification, and/ or
characterizations of unknown systems based on data, typically – and increasingly – large volumes of data. This course is an
advanced research-intensive graduate level course that explores the more advanced and emerging topics of computational
intelligence, such as – but not limited to – graphical models, Monte Carlo approaches, incremental and online learning,
learning in nonstationary environments, deep belief networks, and other topics that are emerging at the time of offering. In
fact, the exact content of the course is likely to evolve over the years due to the rapid development of the field. As an
advanced research intensive course, this class will involve a thorough literature search and review, followed by proposing,
executing and presenting results on a novel real-world computational intelligence problem that is of research interest to the
student. Students will be encouraged to publish the outcomes of their research project.

END

ECE 09702:

Strategic Technical Writing and Winning Grant Proposals

Prerequisites: Successful completion of the Ph.D. Qualifier Examination

Effective technical writing is perhaps one of the most critical skills a Ph.D. engineering graduate needs to have regardless
of the career path chosen upon graduation. Whether writing research papers, technical reports, or grant proposals, the
ability to convey technical engineering knowledge in an effective, understandable, elegant and concise manner is an
important skill. This class will provide the general guidelines, best practices, and most importantly specific strategies for
technical writing for some of the most common venues and audiences, namely writing technical papers for engineering
conferences and journals - including writing rebuttals to reviewers - technical reports and grant proposals. The latter
includes specific strategies for a variety of different sponsors that fund engineering related research, including industrial
sponsors, government and military agencies, foundations as well as intra-company funding sources. The deliverables of this
class includes an actual conference or journal paper and a small scale grant proposal-ready to be submitted - based on
student's area of research.

END

ECE 09704:

Special Topics for Doctoral Students in Electrical Engineering

This class provides timely coverage of specific advanced and emerging topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering, and
it is intended for doctoral students. Special topics courses may be traditional classroom-based courses as well as
research-related courses supervised by specific advisers. This class may be taken multiple times when offered with a
different special topics content.

END

CM 01301:

Fundamentals of the Construction Industry I

Corequisite: CM 01302

This course provides a general overview of the planning, administration, management, and cost of construction projects
and an introduction to the methodology used in executing specific designs. Emphasis is placed on the organization of
construction firms, use and types of primary construction equipment, estimating and quantity take-offs, contractual and
management systems, scheduling, project administration, and inspection of construction operations.

END

CM 01302:

Fundamentals of the Construction Industry II

Prerequisites/Corequisites: CM 01301 (may be taken concurrently)

This course introduces the design process and development of construction documents. It covers the standard design
phases: programming, conceptual design, schematic design, design development, construction documents and construction
administration, and the format and utilization of project manuals including contract specifications, the interpretation and
analysis of engineering plans and specifications, and the new technologies being used in the design including Building
Informational Modeling (BIM) and sustainable (green) practices. The course also explores the various common project
delivery methods.

END

CM 01303:

Project Building Systems

Prerequisites: CM 01301, CM 01302

Students will learn the description and identification of the equipment and materials used in mechanical systems for
heating, ventilating and air conditioning, electrical, plumbing, fire protection, piping, gas, lighting, water and waste water,
conveyance, life safety systems, environmental, security, audio/visual, and building system controls. The course also provides
and introduction to building structural and envelopes systems.

END

CM 01304:

Project Administration

Prerequisites: CM 01304 (Fundamentals of the Construction Industry II ).

This course provides exposure to and use of various types of projects control systems for project efficiency and
documentation. Students will learn how the submittal process operates and is monitored. They will also be shown a variety
of tools used in tracking project documentation, and essential elements related to contract law and administration.

END

CM 01305:

CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATING

Prerequisites: CM 01302 (Fundamentals of the Construction Industry II )

Introduction to various costs of construction including direct and indirect project costs, comparison of hard and soft costs,
job cost analysis and forecasting of cost to completion, labor, material and equipment expenses, cash flow, overhead,
profitability, and general conditions costs. Students will learn research techniques used to create accurate estimating and
bidding procedures.

END

CM 01306:

Construction Project Planning and Scheduling

Prerequisites: CM 01301, CM 01302

Students will learn procedures used in project planning and scheduling that employ float methods of scheduling logic. They
will examine the critical path series of activities of project completion, including the use of computer software applications
for problem solving, and related tools, spreadsheets, and information management. Also covered are work breakdown
structures, activity durations, status reports, resource allocation, re-planning, monitoring, and updating of projects. Students
will develop projects site logistics plans.

END

CM 01407:

Advanced Leadership and Communication

Prerequisites: CM 01302 (Fundamentals of the Construction Industry II )

The course is designed to teach students to become more effective leaders and communicators in the construction
industry. Drawing on various case studies, students will examine ethical practices in the industry. They will define and
role-play effective communications strategies that simulate situations they may encounter within the industry such as
general-to-subcontractor, corporate, and labor relations. Students in this course will also examine principles of negotiation
and dispute resolution in the construction industry.

END

CM 01408:

Industrial Relations in the Construction Industry

Prerequisites: CM 01302 (Fundamentals of the Construction Industry II ).

This course examines various perspectives (union, management, government) on the collective bargaining system in place
in the construction industry. Topics include the legal and regulatory environment, problem solving, and the roles of labor
and corporations.

END

CM 01409:

Building Energy Systems for Construction Managers

Prerequisites: CM 01302

The Building Energy Systems for Construction Managers course provides a conceptual understanding of functions and
performances of energy systems including mechanic al, electrical, electronic, and plumbing and transport systems in
residential and commercial buildings. The course also provides information on integration between energy systems and
other building components. While introducing the concepts of alternative energy sources, energy efficiency, structural
implications of mechanical systems, indoor air quality, and environmental control strategies, the course familiarizes students
with more recent and current efforts in sustainability and green building ideas. The course also introduces codes and
standards relevant to energy devices used in building construction, such as National Fire Protection Association (NFPA),
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE), and National Electrical Code
(NEC).

END

CM 01410:

BUILD CONSTRUCTION SYS & CODES

Prerequisites: CM 01302 (Fundamentals of the Construction Industry II ).

This course provides a conceptual understanding of functions and performance of structural building systems. The primary
purpose of this course is to provide familiarity with use of construction code with reference to International Building Codes
(IBC) 2012. For anyone in the field of construction or construction management it is necessary to know about the concepts
and fundamental aspects of the code. As a result, the course is intended to provide an understanding of how the code was
developed, how it is to be interpreted, and how it is applied to design and construction of buildings, the goal of the course is
to make implementation of the code easier, and clearer to understand. Other than discussions on structural elements and
their construction methods, the course covers issues such as use and occupancy, types of construction, fire-resistive
constructions, interior finishes, building material, inspections, and tests.

END

CM 01411:

Construction Safety and Loss Prevention

Prerequisites: CM 01302 (Fundamentals of the Construction Industry II ).

This course offers a practical guide for eliminating safety and health hazards from construction worksites. The Handbook
of OSHA Construction Safety and Health addressed the occupational safety and health issues faced by those working in the
construction industry. The course covers a vast range of issues including program development, safety and health program
implementation, intervention, and prevention of construction incidents, regulatory hazards faced by those working in the
construction industry and sources of information. The course also features updates for construction regulations,
construction job audit, training requirements, and OSHA regulations. It includes new record keeping guidelines and forms
with additional material on focused inspections. Containing updated contact information for the newest agencies, the
course also presents a model safety and health program, examples of accident analysis and prevention approaches.

END

CM 01412:

Capstone Project - WI

Prerequisites: CM 01303 and CM 01304 and CM 01305 and CM 01306 and CM 01408 and CM 01409 and CM 01410 and CM 01411; Corequisite: CM 01407 (may be taken concurrently)

In the course, students will build on what they have learned in the major, integrating the theory and knowledge that they
gained in class with practical experience in the construction industry. Capstone projects are developed through a series of
project meetings between the student and program faculty, with significant written deliverables.

END

EM 01501:

Engineering Economics

This course covers a variety of topics in engineering economics including the following: making economics decisions,
equivalence and the time value of money, spreadsheets and economic analysis, present worth and equivalent annual worth,
internal rate of return, benefit?cost ratios and breakeven analysis, replacement analysis, depreciation and income taxes,
inflation, value engineering, and decision-making tools.

END

EM 01511:

Strategic Risk Management

This course deals with a range of topics related to risk management including the following: risk terminology, tools for
quantitative analysis of environmental and technological risks, social risk issues, risk in modern life, statistical analysis, data
presentation, dose-response models for carcinogens, model limitations, models of risk aversion, psychological and
community perceptions of risk, risk communication, environmental and health risk issues in the media, and case studies of
accidents and incidents.

END

EM 01512:

Quality In Engineering Management

This course covers a range of topics related to quality in engineering management including the following: concepts and
philosophy of engineering quality management, leading engineers, data analysis, engineering quality assurance and results,
engineering quality methods and tools, continuous process improvement, total quality management within engineering,
six-sigma, quality costs, customer satisfaction in relation to engineering design and quality, vendor relationships and quality,
benchmarking engineering practices and products, statistical process control, quality function development, and case
studies of quality in engineering management.

END

EM 01513:

Engineering Decision Making

This course covers the following topics related to engineering decision making: mathematical decision tree equations,
mathematical programming for optimization of engineering problems, the theory behind methods and models, advanced
statistical models for engineering analysis, advanced linear and non-linear models for engineering analysis, practical
applications of decision methods and models to engineering problems, and identifying and balancing risk associated with
technology development. Case studies dealing with real engineering projects and problems are included.

END

EM 01521:

Construction Management

This course covers the following topics related to construction management: project managers, developers, designers,
contractors, and subcontractors; project startup, construction, and closeout; project financing; control of costs and
schedule; construction contract types, bidding, delivery methods, and changes; bonds and insurance; inspection of work;
claims, disputes, and arbitration; and case studies in construction management.

END

EM 01522:

Construction Scheduling

This course deals with the following topics in construction scheduling: scheduling terminology and history; time and
duration of activities; relationships between project activities; critical path method (CPM); program evaluation and review
technique (PERT); delays and other constraints; schedule development, analysis, and updating; and case studies of project
construction schedules.

END

EM 01523:

Cost Engineering

This course covers a wide variety of topics related to cost engineering including the following: measuring work progress
using costs, manhours, and schedule; earned value; cost and schedule performance; productivity; quantity adjusted budgets;
budget and schedule baselines; control account baselines; cost control versus financial control; analysis, trending, and
forecasting; cost and schedule performance curves; index and other tracking; elements of complete cost; and case studies in
cost engineering.

END

EM 01541:

Engineering Law And Ethics

This course introduces students to law and ethics as it applies to engineering and engineering management. Topics covered
in the area of law include the following: legal responsibilities of owners, designers, and contractors: risk management via
insurance, surety bonds, and contracts; legal implications of the common activities of design professionals; liens; expert
testimony; and patent law. Topics covered in the area of ethics include the following: ethical codes of professionals;
derivation of ethical structures; and the role of the engineer in assuring public safety, health, and welfare. Case studies
dealing with law and ethics are included.

END

EM 01542:

Facilities Management

Prerequisites: Enrollment in Master of Engineering Management Program or Master of Science in Engineering Management Program

The topics covered in this course include the general characteristics and types of facilities: management functions within a
facility and their differences compared with general management; inventory, procurement, operations, and real estate
management; maintenance management and planning, preventive and schedule maintenance, and contract management;
energy management and energy devices, electricity, lighting, water, heating, HVAC, and efficient and intelligent buildings;
safety and environmental management, OSHA, RCRA, air quality, clean air act, and other EPA requirements; emission
control and fleet management; and transport equipment, elevators, escalators, moving walkways, and device operation and
maintenance. In this course, all aspects of managerial and planning concepts are covered, as well as maintenance and
engineering knowhow that are relevant to and needed for the study of facilites managment.

END

EM 01543:

Systems for Engineering Management

Prerequisites: Enrollment in Master of Engineering Management Program or Master of Science in Engineering Management Program

This course teaches engineering management students the art of systems engineering. Engineering management students
will learn systems engineering processes and skills to integrate user needs, manage requirements, conduct technological
evaluation, and build elaborate system architectures. Engineering management students will also learn to assess risk and
establish financial and schedule constraints. The course devotes particular attention to knowledge, skills, mindset, and
leadership qulaities needed for an engineering manager to operate effectively in the area of systems engineering.

END

ENGR 01501:

Special Topics In Engineering

This course is designed to introduce students to emerging topics in the engineering field. Consent of the instructor is
necessary, and prerequisites are determined by the nature of the topic.

END

ENGR 01510:

Finite Element Analysis

Fundamental concepts for the development of finite element analysis are introduced. The element stiffness matrices are
developed using shape functions defined on the elements. Aspects of global stiffness formation, consideration of boundary
conditions, and nodal load calculations are presented. Mesh division and problem modeling considerations are discussed in
detail. Topics of scalar field problems and natural frequency analysis are covered. Computer applications are included.

END

ENGR 01511:

Engineering Optimization

The formulation and modeling aspects of engineering optimization problems are presented. These steps involve setting up
of the objective function to be minimized and the resource and system constraints to be satisfied. Solution techniques using
gradient based methods, zero order methods, and penalty techniques are discussed.

END

ENGR 01597:

Engineering Graduate Research

The objective of this course is for students to define and conduct graduate-level research with the supervision of their
graduate advisor.

END

ENGR 01598:

Master's Thesis Continuation

Prerequisites: 6-9 Credits of "Master's Research and Thesis" (ENGR 01599) and Department Approval

Continuation of supervised research leading to a master's thesis.

END

ENGR 01599:

Master's Research and Thesis

This course will provide a meaningful one-on-one research experience under the direction of an engineering faculty
advisor. The research topic will be chosen by mutual agreement of the student and his or her adviser. The course will include
a thorough literature search and review, the development of a clear and concise problem statement, consultations with other
faculty and professional experts, and the derivation of publishable results.

END

ENGR 01700:

Graduate Seminar: What is Next in Engineering?

Prerequisites: Graduate or Ph.D. standing

One of the primary goals of the Ph.D. in Engineering program is to teach the candidate how to identify unsolved problems
in engineering, formulate a hypothesis for a feasible solution, design experiments or analysis methodologies to implement
the proposed solution, analyze results and draw conclusions, all of which require critical and analytical thinking and problem
solving skills, command of the general body of knowledge as well as state-of-the-art in the area of interest. This is seminar
course where every week on graduate student or guest speaker will present the state-of-the-art in his/her area of research
interest. This course will allow the presenter to describe an unsolved problem of interest, complete a thorough literature review
about related work, and/or present his/her work in that area, and receive comments, suggestions and critical feedback from
the audience. The course will also allow audience members to learn a new topic, provide feedback to their peers, and be
familiar with the breadth of research taking place in the college, while providing a forum for general exchange of ideas within
the college, bringing research active college community together for lively discussions.

END

ENGR 01798:

Doctoral Dissertation Continuation

Prerequisites: 12 or more Credits of "Doctoral Research and Dissertation" (ENGR 01799) & Department Approval

Continuation of supervised research leading to a doctoral dissertation.

END

ENGR 01799:

Doctoral Research and Dissertation

Prerequisites: Ph.D. student status

One of the primary goals of the Ph.D. in Engineering program is to teach the candidate how to identify unsolved problems
in engineering, formulate a hypothesis for a feasible solution, design experiments or analysis methodologies to implement
the proposed solution, and analyze results and draw conclusions. All of these require critical and analytical thinking and
problem solving skills. Achieving such a goal requires methodical and persistent effort over a long period of time for
obtaining command of the general body of knowledge as well as the state-of-the-art in the area of interest, followed by
identifying an unsolved problem that is worth solving, followed by developing and verifying solution(s) and finally
disseminating the new knowledge created by this process. Since this is a long term process, it can only be achieved by
dedicating significant time and effort to this process. Doctoral Research and Dissertation is a variable-credit independent
study based research course that is designed to provide the student necessary time and guidance to help him/her achieve the
aforementioned goals. Students are expected to take appropriate number of credits of this class each semester they are
materially involved with doctoral research, culminating with preparation, execution, and defense of the Dissertation. Each
section of this course is associated with a faculty member, and each student will take that section of this course that is
associated with his/her Ph.D. Advisor, who will be guiding the student's doctoral research.

END

ENGL 02116:

Introduction to Global Literatures in English

This course introduces essential critical methods for the study of literature in relation to major works of global literatures
written in English. Though the choice of specific texts will vary depending upon the instructor, this course focuses on works
of literature in English beyond those written in America and the British Isles. It fulfills the “Global Literacy” requirement of
the Rowan Core.

END

ENGL 02530:

Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion in U.S. Literature

This class explores the ways literary texts enforce, subvert, or otherwise complicate constructions of race, ethnicity, class,
gender, age, physical ability, religion, and/or sexual orientation. The course will address topics such as the formation of
identity, both personal and cultural; privilege and exclusion; assimilation and the myth of the melting pot; immigration;
geographical and metaphorical borderlands; and the complexities of ethnic, religious, and political nationalism.

END

ENGL 02605:

Graduate Studies in Adolescent Literature

Prerequisites: None

This course will introduce students to a range of literature written for, read by, and/or taught to adolescents. Students will
analyze literary works from a variety of theoretical perspectives (including formalist, psychoanalytic, Marxist, postcolonial,
ecological, feminist, and queer) to think about the cultural construction of adolescence and adolescents' relationship to
power. This course may not be offered annually.

END

ENGL 02617:

Teaching Shakespeare

Prerequisites: None

This course begins by examining representative plays by Shakespeare using the approaches of "Understanding by Design."
Next, it considers how to teach the plays with those approaches, especially "essential questions" and "backward design."
This course may not be offered annually.

END

ENGL 02638:

Teaching World Literature

This course will mix theory and world literature in order to provide students with a critical vocabulary they can employ in
their own pedagogy. The course will explore a number of questions about individual, community, nation, time, space,
language, and other topics through poetry, novels, drama, and short stories from Africa, Asia, and South America.

END

ENGL 05301:

American English Grammar

This course emphasizes traditional grammar and seeks to give students a practical understanding of the structure of
contemporary American English grammar.

END

ENGL 05501:

Teaching American English Grammar

Teaching American English Grammar provides an introduction to the history of the English language, including a short
history of grammar instruction; a review of traditional grammar, along with an overview of other grammatical approaches to
English; and the opportunity to explore strategies for teaching grammar to both native and non-native speakers of English,
with attention to how grammatical choices affect rhetorical style and effectiveness.

END

ENT 06504:

Strategic Project-Based Experience

This course is designed to provide strategic focused field based project learning experiences and opportunities for graduate
students by affording them the opportunity to work with a wide variety of public and private organizations. The course uses
a team-based approach to offer consulting advice to organizations with the goal of improving their performance. The
emphasis in the course is on experiential approaches that provide a participative type of learning about the crucial issues
faced by organizations. This course is interdisciplinary in nature and open to all graduate students.

END

ENT 06505:

Entrepreneurship And Innovation

Prerequisites (effective Spring 2009): ACC 03500 and MGT 06502 and MKT 09500

This course provides a broad framework for understanding the nature of entrepreneurship in multiple organizational
settings. The course introduces students to the innovation and idea generation process and helps students apply an
alternative way of "thinking" to assist in solving difficult issues for government, business, and the non-profit sector.

END

ENT 06506:

Corporate Entrepreneurship

This course provides an overview of the potential for innovation and entrepreneurial opportunities or new ventures within
a corporate environment. The course covers various aspects of corporate entrepreneurship. Major topics include
understanding the corporate entrepreneurial revolution, learning about the nature of entrepreneurship within established
organizations (intrapreneurship), understanding the requirements for setting up an environment conducive to being
intrapreneurial within a corporate setting, and learning about the entrepreneurial direction of firms as they grow and evolve.
Among the issues discussed are the role of creativity within corporate entrepreneurship, the relation to product innovation
and technology, the importance of corporate strategy within an entrepreneurial framework, and what it takes to create an
entrepreneurial culture in a corporate setting.

END

ENT 06520:

Evolution of the Cannabis Industry

This industry analysis course forces students to develop a deep understanding of the cannabis industry, its history,
competitive dynamics, opportunities for innovation, and the current business landscape. A historical overview will address
the origins of cannabis, 19th century legal uses, early prohibition, counterculture, the war on drugs, state medical
legalization, new approaches to adult use, and current and potential future federal laws. An overview of the cannabis plant
will review hemp vs. marijuana as well as products, ingestion methods, and the Endocannabinoid system. An overview of
laws and regulations will include federal vs. state vs. local, complexities in the system, provisions relating to medical vs. adult
use (recreational). Social equity will be focused on from perspectives including the lasting effects of the war on drugs,
reinvesting in communities disproportionately impacted, racial and social justice. Key points on cultivation will be reviewed
such as plant science, facilities, financials, and regulatory compliance. Definitions and examples of business types in
categories of plant-touching vs. ancillary will be addressed. Drivers of demand will be examined such as medical and adult
(recreational) use, health and wellness, current and projected demographics, and genetics of plant strains. Analysis of the
economics of cannabis will be analyzed including markets across the industry, potential economic impact, public policy
implications, and financial barriers to entry. Considerations for retail in cannabis will include products, in-store experiences,
in person retail and tech-based platforms for ordering and delivery, and social consumption via lounges, concerts, and other
public venues.

END

ENT 06521:

BUS MODEL INNOVATION CANNABIS

Prerequisites: ENT 06520

Students in this course will explore business model innovations that are applicable across industries, and will also delve into
concepts and constructs that are unique to the highly regulated and rapidly evolving cannabis industry. In exploring
contemporary business models and corporate structure students will learn about common patterns and how to
systematically understand, design, and implement a game-changing business model--or analyze and renovate an old one. Key
elements for business model innovation across all industries to be analyzed include customer segments, value propositions,
channels, customer relationships, revenue streams, key resources, key activities, key partners, and cost structure. Student
will learn how to identify, create, and deliver value for existing and future customers, as well as extract value for a corporate
venture in a sustainable manner. Fundamentals of new venture financing will be considered, such as capital structures for
new ventures (e.g. debt vs. equity), term sheets and how to negotiate them, early-stage vs. later-stage financing.
Cannabis-specific business model implications will be explored in depth as well. This include trademarks and IP, marketing
and branding, multi-state operators (MSOs) vs. standalone businesses, challenges and benefits of vertical integration, costs
for licensing and compliance, and rules and regulations regarding plant-touching vs. ancillary business. Students will alsolearn about the most challenging financial hurdles for plant-touching cannabis entrepreneurs and operators: banking (given
that most national institutions are not willing to support due to federal illegality) and IRS 280E Tax Code (no deductions or
credits are allowed due to federally controlled substance).

END

ENT 06555:

Driving Innovation

Students in this course will work to gain an in-depth understanding on the role that innovation plays in driving process and
cost efficiencies, strategy development, decision making, addressing customer demands and market trends, financial
performance, and business growth. Key models from Entrepreneurship will be analyzed for learning how to target and
implement innovation.

END

ENT 06599:

Special Topics In Entrepreneurship

Students will study advanced level topics in Entrepreneurship. The exact topics will change over time to remain relevant as
practices in industry and markets evolve. Contact the MBA office for additional details.

END

EVSC 01525:

Advanced Global Field Study

This graduate course combines classroom-based and field -based instruction to introduce students to environments
beyond campus. This intensive but unique learning experiences help students make the connection between lecture and
environmental practice in a range of ecosystems and physical environments.

END

EVSC 04510:

Earth's Environment and Natural Systems

A staggering diversity of natural environments covers Earth’s surface in a beautiful and complex mosaic. Environmental
professionals must understand how humans fit within the context of natural systems and how human activities alter these
systems. Students in this course will gain a foundational knowledge of Earth’s natural systems upon which they can build
these understandings. This course will provide an overview of Earth’s natural systems that covers land and sea and stretches
from pole to pole. Students will learn how abiotic factors (e.g. temperature, water, light) control how these natural systems
are distributed and gain knowledge of the global-scale cycles (e.g. water, carbon, nitrogen) that tie all these systems together.

END

EVSC 04511:

The Science of Climate Change

Due to climate change, our Earth systems are currently undergoing, and will continue to undergo in the future, alterations
on a global scale. Scientific evidence reveals the staggering nature and extent of these changes that can already be seen in our
world, and indicates that, without significant action, we are on a trajectory to see far more severe impacts to the natural
world that modern civilization interacts with and depends upon every day. As we face the unprecedented challenge of
combating climate change and its impacts, our hope lies in furthering our understanding of the problem and its potential
solutions. Students in this course will 1) gain an understanding of the science behind climate change 2) discover the impacts
of anthropogenic climate change 3) become familiar with possible adaptation and mitigation strategies from local to global
scale, and 4) develop the skills needed to promote discussion of this important issue and possible ways to address it. Students
will leave this course with an understanding of global change that is essential for today’s environmental professionals, as they
navigate the ever-growing challenges presented by a changing climate.

END

EVSC 04512:

Applied Ecosystem Services

A considerable body of scientific research has shown that biodiversity is crucial to humanity’s survival and well-being. In
recent decades, the term “ecosystem services” has been used to describe the many ways in which biodiversity and
functioning ecosystems sustain and fulfill human life. In this course, students will learn about the types of ecosystem
services, including supporting, provisioning, regulating, and cultural services. Students will also learn about the consequences
of biodiversity losses on food production, such as greater susceptibility to crop losses and increased pest problems, and
effects on public health, including the “Dilution Effect”: greater prevalence of human diseases that accompanies species loss
of plant and animal species.

END

EVSC 05550:

Principles of Green Energy

The production and consumption of energy is one of the most crucial issues in sustainability. Our past and present use of
fossil fuels and non-renewable resources to generate energy has created significant ecological and environmental damage,
and has contributed measurably to global climate change. With an ever-increasing human population, it is critical that we
address our energy needs in a way that will minimize the impacts to planet Earth going forward. In this course, students will
learn about the historical and contemporary generation of energy, and will explore the latest renewable and efficient
methods. There will be a heavy emphasis placed on application of concepts to current and future energy challenges, and
students will learn about how to implement optimization sequences using real world problems.

END

EVSC 05560:

Industrial Health and Safety

This is a three credit graduate course that focuses on the safe handling of hazardous materials based upon their chemical
and physical properties. The course, by way of design, also meets the OSHA training requirements found in 29 CFR
1910.120 for certification as a “40–Hour HAZWOPER” trained individual. A minimum of 40 hours attendance as well as
70% on the final exam in addition to a required practical portion of the course must be successfully completed in order to
receive training certification. If earned, the training certification is valid for one (1) year.

END

EVSC 05605:

Case Studies in Applied Environmental Science

Prerequisites: EVSC 04510 AND EVSC 04512

The role of environmental professionals is to understand how human activities impact or alter environmental systems or
human health and propose strategies to prevent or ameliorate these negative outcomes. One of the key challenges that they
face is translating their understanding into professional or technical documents that can be understood by decision-makers
and stakeholders who do not have their background in environmental science. Generating high quality professional
deliverables is a critical job skill that is foundational to a career in environmental science. Students in this course will analyze
multiple professionally-relevant environmental case studies, become familiar with the types of technical documents required
in each case, and practice writing a subset of these documents. These may include environmental impact statements,
community update reports, environmental permit application and compliance documents, or other relevant and timely
documents.

END

EVSC 05610:

ENVIR SUPPORT SYSTEMS: SOILS

Prerequisites: EVSC 04510

Soils are the dynamic interface between human activity, food production, and Earth system processes. In this course
students will receive an overview of the physical, chemical, and biological characteristics of soil, followed by a thorough
investigation of soil’s role as an environmental support system for humans and wildlife. Global soil resources are crucial for
maintaining food production, clean drinking water, carbon cycling, nutrient cycling, and ecosystem dynamics. Students will
learn about human impacts on soils, and best practices towards optimizing soil health and subsequent societal benefits. This
course is suitable for environmental science graduate students.

END

EVSC 05612:

Environmental Support Systems: Fresh Water

Prerequisites: EVSC 05410

Fresh water is a necessary environmental support system for every aspect of human life, from drinking water to food
production to energy generation to industrial activity. In this course, students gain an environmentally-grounded
understanding of fresh water resources that allows them to engage with the complex debates that often surround their use
and management. Students will learn about fresh surface and groundwater resources, how water moves through these
environments, how human activities alter the chemistry, quality, and availability fresh water, and how these resources can be
managed for sustainable use.

END

EVSC 05613:

Environmental Support Systems: Native Plants in the Landscape

This course will give students a scientific foundation for understanding why native plants are critically important to
ecosystems, and to recognize the problems that arise when non-native invasive plants replace them in natural and disturbed
environments. This course is necessarily interdisciplinary, and during the semester there will be discussions about topics
ranging from evolutionary theory, conservation, restoration ecology, agriculture and public health. This course will employ
classroom and field components, with an emphasis on the observation of plants in disturbed (urban, suburban, agricultural)
and natural ecosystems. Students will become familiar with the ways native plants can be used in stormwater management,
rain gardens, green roofs, and landscaping. Emphasis will be placed on applying gained knowledge towards creating
sustainable and practical solutions to current problems. This course is suitable for any major.

END

EVSC 05620:

Research Design in Environmental Science

Obtaining valid environmental data depends on well-conceived research plans. In this course students will learn to design
studies and experimental data and how those data can be analyzed to draw evidence-based conclusions. Students will
become familiar with sampling design and how observational, comparative, correlational, and experimental approaches can
be used to test hypotheses. Students will also become familiar with the responsible conduct of research.

END

EVSC 05630:

Communicating Environmental Science

It is imperative that scientists be skilled in communicating key scientific concepts and findings, not only to their
colleagues, but also to the general public. This is especially true for environmental science professionals, as they strive to
understand and combat the unprecedented global environmental crisis that our planet is facing due to anthropogenic
climate change. Students in this course will 1) hone their scientific writing and presentation skills, 2) develop the tools
necessary to translate technical and complex scientific concepts and findings to broad and diverse audiences, and 3) become
skilled in using a broad range of communication formats to reach a variety of audiences.

END

EVSC 05660:

Risk Assessment

Prerequisites: EVSC 04510

Large scale anthropogenic processes can potentially have harmful impacts on human and environmental health.
Policy-makers, managers, and stakeholders depend on accurate environmental risk assessments to learn the facts about
environmental stressors and their effects on individuals and ecosystems. Risk Assessment is a transdisciplinary, multifaceted
approach to solving public and environmental health science problems because it combines the key principles of exposure
sciences (through assessment of exposure), toxicology (through hazard identification), and modeling (through dose-response
assessment) to characterize risks from biological, chemical, or physical agents and public health situations. In this course,
students will explore all of the major components of risk assessment and learn how to make the critical calculations related
to risk exposure. Students will also explore the underlying assumptions of risk assessment and consider their implications forpolicy and public health.

END

EVSC 05685:

Applied Environmental Science Graduate Clinic

Prerequisites: EVSC 05605

Students apply knowledge gained through their previous coursework to solve a particular research problem of their choice
within the broad scope of environmental science. Students have the opportunity to work in class, and may choose to work
individually or in teams.

END

ENGR 01591:

Independent Graduate Study In Engineering

This course is designed for graduate engineering students. They will conduct work under the supervision of an appropriate
faculty member on engineering projects. The execution of the proposed project, including the preparation and presentation
of an acceptable report of work, will be required.

END

ENGR 01660:

Research Design in Engineering Education

This course will describe research design in the context of engineering education. It will provide an overview of theoretical
frameworks, development of research questions, types of methods (both quantitative and qualitative), as well as discuss
research quality. Students will also learn how to critique engineering education research on the basis of its design and
research quality. The emphasis will be placed on research design for studies focused on the research to practice continuum.

END

XEED 01601:

Effective Teaching in Academic, Corporate and Government Settings

Prerequisites: Ph.D. student status

This unique course, team-taught by faculty and professionals in education, engineering and industry, provides students
with an in-depth exploration of effective teaching practices in academic, corporate, and government settings. Students will
gain a broad view of the role and function of teaching and oral presentation, as well as how to communicate effectively in
these settings. Specifically, this course will introduce instructional methods and strategies, adult learning theory and
implications for effective teaching, documenting and assessing student learning, and how to improve instruction in
academic, corporate, and government settings. Several real-world scenarios will be discussed and simulated, including
preparing academic courses and corporate training packages, assessing audience background and setting appropriate
technical rigor and level, building classroom / meeting room / presentation room management skills, conflict avoidance and
resolution in such settings; effective strategies for delivering technical content at meetings and conferences, and answering
audience questions that may be adversarial in nature. The course will provide readings, discussions, assignments, and most
importantly ample opportunities for practice teaching, including a semester-long apprenticeship with Engineering faculty,
allowing the student to experience all aspects of teaching and classroom management. The course will also feature guest
speakers from industry and government agencies providing unique perspectives for effective teaching and presentation at
such settings.

END

XEED 01650:

Engineering Education Fundamentals

The purpose of this course is to provide students with foundational knowledge about the field of engineering education. As
such, students will learn about the history of engineering education and its evolution, the breadth of research areas that are
investigated within engineering education, current issues facing the field, and primary stakeholders involved within
engineering education.

END

XEED 01660:

Research Design in Engineering Education

This course will describe research design in the context of engineering education. It will provide an overview of theoretical
frameworks, development of research questions, types of methods (both quantitative and qualitative), as well as discuss
research quality. Students will also learn how to critique engineering education research on the basis of its design and
research quality. The emphasis will be placed on research design for studies focused on the research to practice continuum.

END

ENST 94501:

Sustainable Commerce

Students will examine the historical and philosophical origins of sustainability and competing/related concepts like
sustainable development, resilience, ecological modernization, de-growth, the pollution-as-externality concept, and
environmental justice. These critiques of market capitalism are examined as an entry point for understanding not only
environmental problems themselves, but also the positive contributions to sustainability that business and commerce can
make, if properly structured. The impacts of "green" industries, products, and business practices are also examined. This
course may be offered online.

END

ENST 94502:

Sustainability Assessment

Students will learn different approaches for setting sustainability goals, measuring progress towards sustainability
outcomes, and managing so-called "sustainability transitions." Students will learn about the increasingly important role of
sustainability officers in different firms, and gain exposure to concepts and practices in sustainability reporting for both
shareholder, regulatory, and scientific purposes. This course may be offered online.

END

ENST 94503:

Perspectives on Environmental Regulation, Policy, and Law

Students will engage in an intensive overview of state, federal, and international environmental policies, regulatory
structures, and laws. Students will learn the history of environmental law and policy in the US and around the world, as well
as the environmental regulatory toolkit and how it relates to commercial activity. Topics will include command-and-control
regulation, market-based incentives, consumer education, and 'nudges' towards behavioral change. This course may be
offered online.

END

ENST 94504:

Topics in Sustainability Innovation and Problem Solving

Students in this seminar/practicum type class will study the implementation of sustainability transitions, in the context of
current events and emerging ideas related to sustainability studies. Students will identify industries and/or societal
challenges that could benefit from sustainability thinking and develop plans for implementing a new product, system, or
structure. This course may be offered online.

END

GEOG 06501:

Independent Study Geography

This course provides individual enrollment semester hours in directed study and/or research under the supervision of a
faculty member. Topics will vary.

END

GEOG 06553:

Workshop In Geography

This course is designed for in-service teachers who wish to further develop their competencies in new teaching techniques
and technologies in geography, including computer-assisted instruction and computer cartography. Contemporary
geographic topics will be explored within a regional context of each major world region. Students will actively participate in
applying new concepts, current data, and innovative techniques in geography by designing and presenting sample lessons at
their grade level. (Summer only)

END

GEOG 16100:

Earth, People, And The Environment

This course provides a broad survey of the geographic approach to knowledge about the world and the field of geography.
The course introduces the natural order of the physical environment, human modification of environments, organization of
society, and regional studies. The course places particular emphasis on contemporary environmental problems and the role
of geography in helping to understand and address local, regional, and global issues.

END

GEOG 16110:

Cultural Geography

This course focuses upon the varied and changing cultural environments of the world. Through a synthesis of data from
many disciplines (i.e., anthropology, ecology, earth sciences, history, etc.), major cultural differences and areal patterns are
identified and analyzed.

END

GEOG 16140:

World Regional Geography

A survey of the entire world that uses the regional approach to geographical analysis, this course provides students with a
basic foundation of geographic knowledge and concepts applicable to the contemporary world. It stresses resource
distribution, environmental characteristics, population problems, food and water supplies, cultural variations and
developmental strategies.

END

GEOG 16160:

Digital Earth: Mapping and Geographic Information Science

This course provides the student with the conceptual tools required for intelligent and critical use, interpretation and
analysis of maps. In addition, the course furnishes the student with an introduction to and overview of the mapping
sciences. Students learn the concepts, methods, and techniques common to the several branches of the mapping sciences
and are introduced to cartography, satellite remote sensing, computer-assisted cartography, and geographical information
systems. Because of its increasing importance, special emphasis is placed on geographical information systems. This course
fulfills the Rowan Core Artistic Literacy.

END

GEOG 16260:

Fundamentals of Geographic Information Systems (GIS)

Prerequisites: GEOG 16160

Fundamentals of Geographic Information Systems introduces students to the concepts and applications associated with
creating, maintaining, analyzing, displaying, and interpreting geospatial data. Through the completion of activities and
assignments, students gain experience with the fundamental tools for geospatial analysis, coupled with the knowledge of
how best to apply them to real-world issues in the natural and human landscapes.

END

GEOG 16261:

Cartography

Prerequisites: GEOG 16160

This course studies the elements of cartography with emphasis on the map as a basic form of communication. It explores
contemporary design concepts and various graphic techniques. Students create cartographic compositions using the latest in
geographical information system and cartographic software using the facilities of the department's computer teaching
laboratory.

END

GEOG 16290:

History & Methods of Modern Geography

Prerequisites: Any two of the following courses: GEOG 16100,GEOG 16110,GEOG 16130,GEOG 16140, GEOG 16160

This course provides the theoretical foundation to the field of geography. It explores the different bodies of thought and
methodological practices which have shaped the character of geography from the late 19th century to the present. This
exploration will cross the traditional sub-disciplinary divisions of human geography, physical geography and GIScience,
examining the ways in which all three have been woven together and pulled apart by broad intellectual trends in the
discipline. When the course is finished, students should be able to place their own research into disciplinary context, and
gain a useful perspective on the similarities and differences between contemporary geographic subfields, and their methods,
as contingent, historical products.

END

GEOG 16307:

Transportation Planning and Policy

This course provides an introduction to transportation planning and policy in the 21st Century United States context. The
course examines all aspects of the modern transportation system, from questions of accessibility and financing to equity and
sustainability. Students will acquire a comprehensive knowledge of how transportation systems work and how our society
will need to improve them in the near future.

END

GEOG 16334:

The Geography of Natural Disasters

There are thousands of examples in which the forces of nature have suddenly claimed human lives and destroyed manmade
constructions on a large scale. This course will introduce the nature, causes, risks, effects, and prediction of natural disasters
including earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, landslides, subsidence, global climate change, severe weather, coastal erosion,
floods, mass extinctions, and meteorite impacts. It will cover geologic principles and case histories of natural disasters and
human responses (societal impact, mitigation strategies, and public policy).

END

GEOG 16350:

Quantitative and Qualitative Methods

This course introduces quantitative and qualitative techniques designed especially for analysis of spatial patterns and
distributions. Students will learn a variety of inferential statistical methods, including basic elements of sampling, analysis of
variance, and probability. Students will also learn how to combine knowledge learned from these methods with qualitative
methods such as interviews, focus groups, and observation.

END

GEOG 16360:

Applications of Geographic Information Systems

Prerequisites: GEOG 16260

Applications of Geographic Information Systems builds upon the foundational concepts introduced in prerequisite
courses to examine the concepts and techniques of advanced geospatial analysis. Building upon a series of techniques,
coupled with real-world applications, students employ geospatial data and methods to complile, analyze, visualize, and
interpret results, as well as examine critical issues related to data management and maintenance. The course is intended to
prepare the student for both the professional GIS workforce and advanced research with GIS.

END

GEOG 16361:

Geovisualization

Prerequisites: GEOG 16160

This course explores geovisualization and related GIS and cartographic techniques. Geovisualization communicates
geospatial information in ways that allow for data exploration and decision-making processes. Techniques covered include
temporal modeling of processes over time and 3D fly-thru of virtual terrain. The techniques are applied to real-world
problem solving in fields such as environmental modeling, planning, archeology, crime mapping and natural resource
management.

END

GEOG 16370:

Drones, Planes, and Satellites

Prerequisites: GEOG 16160

This course introduces students to techniques of spatial analysis using satellite imagery and aerial photography. It
intersperses practical exercises in photo interpretation and digital image processing with demonstrations that include a wide
range of photographic and non-photographic source material, including infra-red thermal and micro-wave images, digital
orthographic photos as well as LANDSAT and other satellite platforms.

END

GEOG 16375:

Remote Sensing Of The Environment

Prerequisites: GEOG 16260

This course emphasizes the integration of remotely sensed data into geographic information systems (GIS). It includes
applications of advanced remote sensing techniques and data processing for use in environmental planning and land resource
management. This course may not be offered annually.

END

GEOG 16390:

Geography Research Clinic/Studio

This course presents a project-based experience for students working with a faculty mentor. Modeled on the engineering
clinic and a traditional planning studio, students apply knowledge gained through their previous coursework to solve a
particular research, policy or planning problem. Projects will be solicited from local agencies and businesses and students
will work as individuals or within teams to provide viable solutions.

END

GEOG 16391:

Directed Geographic Field Experiences

This course offers an introduction to geographic field research methods, class field trips to places chosen by instructor and
students. Students will complete a field research project taken on a topic chosen in consultation with the instructor. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

GEOG 16462:

Web-Based GIS Mapping

This course introduces web-based mapping technologies and applications. Students will gain the skills of creating their
own map services which can then be used to create custom web-based maps. The course will focus on both open-source and
commercial software packages to produce mapping and data services. Students will also explore the client-side offerings to
produce mapping applications. The course culminates in a final web mapping project.

END

GEOG 16550:

Selected Topics in Geography, Planning, & Sustainability

Prerequisite: Permission from instructor

This course is designed to introduce students to emerging topics in Geography, Planning, & Sustainability. The content
will vary according to the interests of the students and expertise and availability of faculty. The course contributes to the
preparation of students for careers in the Urban and Regional planning profession. The course may also provide necessary
foundational knowledge for a subsequent specialized studio course. Permission of instructor to enroll is required.
Otherwise, the course is available to both program and non-program graduate students who wish to use the course as an
elective.

END

GEOG 16553:

Workshop In Geography

This course is designed for in-service teachers who wish to further develop their competencies in new teaching techniques
and technologies in geography, including computer-assisted instruction and computer cartography. Contemporary
geographic topics will be explored within a regional context of each major world region. Students will actively participate in
applying new concepts, current data, and innovative techniques in geography by designing and presenting sample lessons at
their grade level. (Summer only)

END

GEOG 16560:

Digital Earth: Mapping and Geographic Information Science

This course provides the student with the conceptual tools required for intelligent and critical use, interpretation, and
analysis of maps. In addition, the course furnishes the student with an introduction to and overview of the mapping
sciences. Students learn the concepts, methods, and techniques common to the several branches of the mapping sciences
and are introduced to cartography, satellite remote sensing, computer-assisted cartography, and geographic information
systems. This course is targeted toward graduate students and serves as a prerequisite for Fundamentals of Geographic
Information Systems or another program elective.

END

GEOG 16561:

Cartography

Prerequisites: GEOG 16560 or GEOG 16160 or permission of the instructor

This course studies the elements of cartography with emphasis on the map as a basic form of communication. It explores
contemporary design concepts and various graphic techniques. Students create cartographic compositions using the latest in
geographical information system and cartographic software using the facilities of the department's computer teaching
laboratory. This course is targeted toward graduate students.

END

GEOG 16562:

Web-Based GIS Mapping Geography

Prerequisites: GEOG 16160 or GEOG 16560

This course introduces web-based mapping technologies and applications. Students will gain the skills of creating their
own map services which can then be used to create custom web-based maps. The course will focus on both open-source and
commercial software packages to produce mapping and data services. Students will also explore the client-side offerings to
produce mapping applications. The course culminates in a final web mapping project. This course is targeted toward
graduate students.

END

GEOG 16565:

Geographic Information Systems (GIS) Topics And Applications

Geographic Information Systems (GIS) Topics and Applications provides an extended exploration into geospatial science
and analysis at the graduate level. Students develop advanced GIS skills through a project-based approach culminating in a
final project and presentation. The course deepens the understanding of raster and vector data structures as well as the
ability to work with computational algorithms used in GIS analysis. Students learn through lectures, demonstrations,
computer laboratory sessions and a project paper and presentation.

END

GEOG 16575:

Remote Sensing of Environment

Prerequisites: GEOG 31660

This course emphasizes the integration of remotely sensed data into geographic information systems (GIS). It includes
applications of advanced remote sensing techniques and data processing for use in environmental planning and land resource
management. This course may not be offered annually. This course is targeted toward graduate students.

END

GEOG 16591:

Independent Study in Geography

This course provides individual enrollment semester hours in directed study and/or research under the supervision of a
faculty member. Topics will vary.

END

GEOG 16661:

Geovisualization

Prerequisites: GEOG 31660

This course explores geographic visualization (Geovisualization) and related cartographic and graphic design techniques.
The course content is primarily focused on GIS-based spatial planning, design, analysis, and 2D/3D visualization techniques.
Students are exposed to the basic knowledge of using GIS and Geovisualization in site analysis, site design, public
participatory GIS (PPGIS), and design charrettes. The concepts of qualitative Geovisualization and other emerging tools
and techniques are also introduced.

END

GEOG 16665:

Geospatial Measurement and Environmental Modeling

Prerequisites: GEOG 31660 or Permission of the Instructor.

This course introduces advanced techniques in the GIS data manipulation, geostatistics and geospatial modeling. The
fundamental theories behind the analytical and modeling techniques are covered in detail. The theoretical knowledge will be
enforced by a series of intensive computer exercises using real data sets. It covers descriptive and predictive GIS modeling
techniques, including logit modeling (logistic regression), spatial statistics, geo-statistics, environmental diversity indices,
Boolean logic, and map algebra.

END

GEOG 16670:

Drones, Planes, and Satellites

Prerequisites: GEOG 16160 or GEOG 16560

This course introduces students to techniques of spatial analysis using satellite imagery and aerial photography. It
intersperses practical exercises in photo interpretation and digital image processing with demonstrations that include a wide
range of photographic and non-photographic source material, including infra-red thermal and micro-wave images, digital
orthographic photos as well as LANDSAT and other satellite platforms. This course is targeted toward graduate students.

END

GEOG 31660:

Fundamentals of Geographic Information Systems

This course introduces students to the concepts and applications associated with creating, maintaining, analyzing,
displaying, and interpreting geospatial data. Through the completion of activities and assignments, students gain experience
with the fundamental tools for geospatial analysis, coupled with the knowledge of how best to apply them to real-world
issues in the natural and human landscapes. This course is suitable for planners, geographers, and relevant professionals.

END

PLAN 31280:

Intro to City Planning

This course provides students with a conceptual foundation to the field of planning. Topics include the history and
development of planning, the politics of planning, planning analysis and implementation, urban design, environmental
planning and planning implementation process and management. Particular emphasis is placed on the current trends in the
field including ecological based planning, redevelopment and sustainable communities.

END

PLAN 31383:

Metropolitan/Regional Planning

Prerequisites: PLAN 31280

This course studies the philosophy, history, techniques, and problems of metropolitan and regional planning. Although it
focuses on large scale-planning in the United States, the course makes some comparative analysis of planning in other
countries. It emphasizes geographic techniques in regional analysis, as well as the roles of federal, state, and local agencies in
planning. Students learn and use simulation and gaming techniques in the preparation of regional plans. This course may not
be offered annually.

END

PLAN 31386:

Land Use And Conservation

Prerequisites: PLAN 31280

This course examines people's changing perceptions of the economic use potential of land focusing on how land is a
combination of physical, economic, political and cultural interactions. The course explores the basics of land use law,
property rights, land use conflicts and the various avenues for land conservation and open space preservation.

END

PLAN 31540:

Advanced Historic Preservation

This course introduces students to the practice of historic preservation as undertaken by urban and regional planners.
Students learn about different philosophical approaches to preservation, as well as cultural awareness of different types of
and needs for preservation. Students learn the legal and regulatory aspects of historic preservation, as well as how to gather
information about historic properties, buildings, and other spaces in order to advance preservation efforts. Preservation
technologies are examined, as are efforts to advance goals of sustainability within preservation.

END

PLAN 31580:

Introduction to Planning: Past, Present, and Future

This course focuses on the comprehension, representation, and use of ideas and information in the planning field,
including appropriate perspectives from history, social science, and the design professions. Course content offers the
primary reasons planning is undertaken by communities, cities, regions, and nations, and the impact planning is expected to
have. Specific topics include history of human settlements, planning history, planning theory, global dimensions of planning,
and planning processes to influence the future.

END

PLAN 31587:

Graduate Seminar in Food Systems Planning

This graduate level course explores the food supply chains within the US that brings food from the field to the table and
describes the ways that planners are utilizing traditional planning tools to build more sustainable and resilient regionally
based food systems. Students will compare both conventional and alternative supply chains identifying the benefits and
limitations of both, as well as examine the policy and programmatic initiatives taken by planners to maximize these benefits
and minimize these limitations. Additional topics include land conservation, food access, urban agriculture and economic
development.

END

PLAN 31589:

Environment and Sustainability Planning

Prerequisites: PLAN 31580

This course offers a broad understanding of sustainability and environmental factors in planning from a local to global
perspective. It explores environmental, economic, and social/political factors that contribute to sustainable communities,
and investigates the role of planning processes in the creation of sustainable futures. The course examines planning’s
implications on individual and community health within the built environment. Course materials also discuss key issues in
equity, diversity, and social justice that emphasize the planner's role in expanding choice and opportunity for all.

END

PLAN 31590:

Research Methods in Planning

This course introduces quantitative and qualitative methods and modeling tools, and their applications to planning
research and planning practice, including forecasting, policy analysis, and design of projects and plans. Students learn how to
pose clear and researchable questions relevant to urban and regional planning, collect and process data, analyze data using
quantitative or qualitative research tools, and present results using clear, accurate, and compelling text, graphics, and maps
to a variety of audiences, including other planners, citizens, and public or elected officials. They also learn tools for
assembling and analyzing ideas and information from prior practice and scholarship.

END

PLAN 31593:

Planning Communication

The aim of this course is to prepare students for planning and relevant professions by ensuring that they are aware of and
trained in proper professional communications standards. Students recognize the need for appropriate outreach strategies
for communicating with the public and gain knowledge to develop and utilize tools for effective in-person or virtual
stakeholder engagement. In addition to basic written, oral, and graphical communication skills, this course introduces skills
related to leadership, team building, facilitation, mediation, community motivation development, and strategic decision
making.

END

PLAN 31685:

Planning Practice, Law, and Ethics

Prerequisites: PLAN 31580

This three-module course prepares students for the professional planning field by introducing topics related to planning
practice, planning law, and planning ethics. The first module is focused on the roles of officials, stakeholders, and
community members in planned change. It also introduces economic, infrastructure, social, and cultural factors to urban
and regional growth and change. The second module provides legal and institutional contexts within which planning occurs.
The final module presents key issues of planning ethics and related questions of the ethics of public decision-making,
research, and client representation.

END

PLAN 31686:

Community Planning, Engagement, and Design

Prerequisites: PLAN 31580 and PLAN 31589

This course introduces various planning methods applied in community planning, community engagement, and community
design activities by using a Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) framework. The course content focuses on spatial or
physical planning topics such as the design, arrangement, appearance, and functionality of building sites, neighborhoods,
towns and cities, as well as the shaping and uses of safe public spaces. The course also explores sustainable design principles,
techniques, and practices related to spatial or physical planning. Students explore design elements at both macro and micro
scales and learn to incorporate those elements in workable urban design projects and community plans.

END

PLAN 31695:

Planning Studio

Prerequisites: PLAN 31580 and PLAN 31590 and PLAN 31593 and GEOG 31660 and PLAN 31589 and PLAN 31685 and PLAN 31686

Graduate planning students produce their capstone projects in this studio. Under direct supervision of planning faculty,
students undertake a planning project in cooperation with a local, regional, national, or international client. Students apply
their relevant knowledge and skills gained from all required as well as elective courses in this project. They work in small
groups focusing on different aspects of planning. Whenever appropriate, students get engaged with community
stakeholders and assess their interests. The final product of this studio is a professional-level plan or a policy report.

END

GEOL 01570:

Research Experience in Geology

The course provides students with research experience in geology as undergraduates. Student select a geology faculty
mentor to conduct at least one semester of research. One semester of this course is required for both B.A. and B.S. degree
majors, but two semesters is encouraged for B.S. majors.

END

GEOL 01701:

Seminar in Geology

The course is focused on teaching students how to critically evaluate scientific papers or current research endeavors to
effectively articulate in writing and through oral presentation using precise language founded in science the content of
papers. Students will be given various homework assignments that include but are not limited to discussion on papers or on
other student presentations. This is a required course that all first year PhD students in Geology.

END

GEOL 01702:

Avanced Seminar in Geology

Prerequisites: GEOL 01701

The course is an extension of GEOL 01701 with a major addition. The course meets weekly with different topics presented
each week. Students will be required to read a specific scientific paper with one or more students presenting on the merits
and shortcomings of the research presented in the paper. The course is focused on teaching students how to critically
conduct original research and present their research through written and oral mediums. Students are required to conduct
new research, either in the laboratory or through literature reviews and present their findings for the entire cohort and
professors and critical review each other’s work through constructive feedback. This is a required course that all first year
PhD students in geology must take and is equivalent to a laboratory course.

END

GEOL 01703:

Proposal Writing and Grant Management in Geology

In this course students learn about writing a proposal, the importance of setting clearly defined research goals, expected
outcomes, milestones, statements of work, establishing a proper budget, and how to sell their research to a variety of
funding sources. In addition, students learn how to manage a grant or contract once it has been awarded to a home
institution, how to work effectively with a sponsored research office, the importance of progress reports in the form of
abstracts and refereed papers, and closing out a grant. Students also learn how to critical review proposals. This is a required
course that all first year PhD students in geology must take and is equivalent to a laboratory course.

END

GEOL 01704:

Communication and Ethics in Geology

In this course students learn about different methods of communication within science as well as the ethics of science and
the workplace. The course explores the writing of different types of scientific papers, books and book chapters, the
different kind of oral presentations, outreach to different audiences, and the overall importance of an ethical research,
teaching, and outreach programs in science. This is a required course that all first year PhD students in geology must take
and is equivalent to a laboratory course.

END

GEOL 01705:

Graduate Colloquium

In this course students are exposed to research in many areas of the School of Earth and Environment through its
established colloquium series. This is a required course that all first year PhD students in geology must take.

END

GEOL 01706:

Advanced Graduate Colloquium

Building on the experience of GEOL 01705, the students will collectively as a course create and successfully run a
colloquium series within geology. In this course students are exposed to research in many areas of research, how to invite
speakers, how to successful operate a lecture series as a group. This is a required course that all first year PhD students in
geology must take.

END

GEOL 01710:

Fundamental Research 1

In this course students will focus developing their dissertation research culminating in a successful candidacy exam (PhD
dissertation proposal defense) at the end of the second year. This is a required course that all second year PhD students in
geology must take.

END

GEOL 01711:

Fundamental Research 2

Prerequisites: GEOL 01710

This course is a continuation of Fundamental Research 1. In this course students will focus developing their dissertation research culminating in a successful 
candidacy exam (PhD dissertation proposal defense) at the end of their second year. This is a required course that all second year PhD students in geology.

END

GEOL 01712:

Topics in Graduate Geology

This course changes from semester to semester and will be topical in nature. The topics that will be covered will, in part,
depend on the student cohort and the availability of professors. This is a required course that all second year PhD students
in geology must take with two semesters required. The course is designed to help prepare students for their candidacy exams
and dissertation research.

END

GEOL 01713:

Advanced Topics in Graduate Geology

Prerequisites: GEOL 01712

This course follows GEOL 01.712 in that it is a topical course that changes from semester to semester. The topics that will
be covered will, in part, depend on the student cohort and the availability of professors. This is a required course that all
second year PhD students in geology must take with two semesters required. The course is designed to help prepare
students for their candidacy exams and dissertation research.

END

GEOL 01730:

Dissertation Research in Geology

Prerequisites: Successful completion of PhD qualification and candidacy examination.

In this course students will focus their attention on their dissertation research, the writing of papers to be published, and
their PhD dissertation. This is a required course that all PhD students in Geology must take.

END

MBS 00501:

Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

This is an all-inclusive site that contains the E-book, learning exercises and quizzes. You will have to purchase a 6-month
access for this site. Go to http://www.macmillanhighered.com/launchpad/tymoczko3e/8162223 This course will cover the
broad topic of biochemistry. This starts with a basic understanding of thermodynamics and chemical bonds and leads into
amino acids, proteins and enzymes as well as carbohydrate and lipid structure and function. We will also cover intermediary
metabolism and provide a perspective of disease states. The intent is to learn biochemistry by studying and learning how
proteins underlie human disease.

END

MBS 00502:

Cell Biology

This course is focused on biology and physiology of the cell and is organized around the central theme of homeostasis –
how the cells adopt to various environmental changes while maintaining their internal constancy necessary for all tissues and
organs to function. It is a course for both the basic scientists who seek general principles about cellular function, and the
students preparing for health-related careers who wish to apply fundamental knowledge on cell biology to understand the
molecular mechanisms of cellular dysfunction in human diseases.

END

MBS 00614:

Molecular Mechanisms of Aging

Prerequisites: MBS 00501, MBS 00502, MBS 00503 (Must pass each course)

The major goal of this course is to acquaint second-year Master’s students with fundamental information regarding the
aging-associated molecular pathways and to update them on the most recent advancements in the studies of molecular
mechanisms of aging. The emphasis will be given to the discussion of the most popular aging theories, experimental
attempts to improve longevity in animal models, and their critical analysis from the scientific standpoint. During the course,
the students will be provided a solid understanding of the most popular subject in translational science that attracts billions
of research dollars but is seldom taught as a conceptual course. It is a course for both the basic biomedical scientists who
seek to understand the nature of aging and aging-associated processes, and the students preparing for health-related careers
who are eager to expand their knowledge on "diseases and conditions associated with growing older, in order to extend the
healthy, active years of life" (from the National Institute of Aging Mission Statement).

END

MBS 00615:

Case Studies in Biology & Medicine

Prerequisites: MBS 00501, MBS 00502, MBS 00503

This course is intended to help the student advance in the learning process. We will analyze topics of biological and
medical interest and attempt to recognize and apply thought processes to understanding the biological phenomena or the
clinical situation. The goal of this course is to go through case studies of biological and clinical significance and develop an
appreciation for the levels of thought that are required to understand the underlying mechanisms and pathways and
communicate about the topic under consideration.

END

MBS 00659:

GSBS Maintaining Matriculation

A Master of Biomedical Science program student who requires an additional semester to complete a course, especially a
RowanSOM course that begins in the fall and ends in the spring, may register for GSBS Maintaining Matriculation during
the subsequent semester. This course will carry a variable credit weight of 0-9 credits (5 credits are part-time status; 9 credits
are full-time status). The GSBS office will be responsible for certifying that a student is completing a course in progress on a
part-time or full-time basis commensurate with the number of credits they are registered for in the previous semester. The
student will not be charged tuition or a fee for continuation regardless of the number of credits for which they are
registered. A student can only register for GSBS Maintaining Matriculation for one (1) semester. This course is not graded.

END

MPI 00504:

Topics in Molecular Pathology & Immunology

This course provides the student with a factual understanding of key host/pathogen elements related to the development
of human disease, in an introductory manner. The course will cover major human pathogens and their disease-causing
mechanisms (Microbiology). In addition, the human immune system is presented in the context of host-defense against
infectious and malignant disease (Immunology). Mechanisms of tumorigenesis and metastasis are explored (Cancer), as are
the metabolic mechanisms underpinning diabetes, obesity and related disorders (Metabolic Diseases). Finally, shorter
elements describe the creation, validation and standardization of new molecular diagnostic tools (Diagnostics); the critical
(statistical) evaluation of experimental data (Statistics); important elements of high-throughput screening and early stage
drug discovery (Drug Discovery); an introduction to the discovery, mechanism of action, and resistance to antimicrobial
agents (Antimicrobial Agents); as well as a discussion of the genetics of cancer and other diseases (Medical Genetics). Upon
completion of the course, students will have gained a broad overview of the theoretic and practical aspects of the subjects
that underlie the laboratory courses they may take in the future.

END

ATR 00105:

Introduction to Healthcare in Sports Medicine

This course focuses on the healthcare team and delivery systems. Students will learn about legal responsibilities, ethical
issues, safety, infection control, communication, interpersonal behaviors, wellness, and disease as it pertains to Sports
Medicine and providing optimal healthcare.

END

ATR 00220:

Pathology and Evaluation of Orthopedic Injuries II

Prerequisites: (ATR 00219 or PHED 35219) Corequsite: ATR 00239

This course provides an examination of the etiology, epidemiology, pathology and assessment of injuries and illnesses to
the upper extremity, head, axial skeleton, chest, and thorax. Structural, functional and surface anatomy will be reviewed. In
addition to didactic classroom time, students are also instructed, given time to practice and evaluated on pertinent athletic
training psychomotor competencies and clinical proficiencies within a practical laboratory experience. There is an
observational field experience associated with this class.

END

ATR 00339:

Foundations in Sports Medicine II

Prerequisites: ATR 00210

This is the second course in a series that will provide students with foundational knowledge that will be useful in preparing
them to apply to the Athletic Training Program. This course will teach students principles of a systematic clinical
evaluation, nutrition and its role in tissue healing, injury prevention and performance optimization, and therapeutic
interventions.

END

ATR 00340:

Foundations in Sports Medicine III

Prerequisites: ATR 00339

This is the third course in a series that will provide students with foundational knowledge that will be useful in preparing
them to apply to the Athletic Training Program. This course will teach students principles of prophylactic strapping and
bracing, research methodology, and basic pharmacology. It will also cover the professional and dispositional requirements of
the Professional Preparation component of the Athletic Training Program.

END

ATR 00341:

Clinical Techniques in Athletic Training IV

Prerequisites: (ATR 00340 or PHED 35340) Corequsite(s): ATR 00361

This course, designed for second semester seniors, will review and evaluate clinical proficiencies previously discussed in
General Medical Conditions and Pharmacology and related topics relevant to previous course work. Students meet once per
week in the Athletic Training Laboratory to practice and discuss topics pertinent to their clinical assignment. The clinical
assignment enables students to develop and assimilate patient care skills under the direct supervision of a certified athletic
trainer and/or approved clinical instructor within the athletic training room, exposure to intercollegiate athletics and/or at
approved affiliated sites.

END

ATR 00347:

Applied Biomechanics

Prerequisites: HES 00346 with minimum grade of C-; Athletic Training students must earn minimum grade of C.

This course provides students with a foundation in the biomechanical concepts and applications that describe and govern
human movement. Topics of the course will include, but are not limited to: friction, linear and angular motion, tissue
mechanical properties, conservation of energy, work and power, fluid mechanics, stability and center of gravity, walking and
running gait analysis. Topics are analyzed quantitatively through the use of modern biomechanical analyses including motion
capture, electromyography, and force plates.

END

ATR 00358:

Residency in Athletic Training I

Prerequisites: (ATR 00220 or PHED 35220) and acceptance in the Professional Phase of the Athletic Training Education program Corequisites: ATR 00338

This clinical education course, designed for first semester juniors, will review and evaluate, within a clinical assignment,
those clinical proficiencies discussed in previous and concurrent course work using a learning-over-time model. The clinical
assignment enables students to develop and assimilate patient care skills under the direct supervision of a certified athletic
trainer and/or approved clinical instructor within the athletic training room, exposure to intercollegiate athletics and/or at
approved affiliated sites. During this course, the student will be formally evaluated by an Approved Clinical Instructor only.
This course must be takend and successfully completed in conjunction with ATR 00338 Clinical Techniques in Athletic
Training I before a student may continue to matriculate through the Athletic Training Education Program.

END

ATR 00359:

Residency in Athletic Training II

Prerequisites: (ATR 00338 or PHED 35338) and (ATR 00358 or PHED 35358) Corequisite(s): ATR 00339

This clinical education course, designed for second semester juniors, will review and evaluate, within a clinical setting,
those clinical proficiencies discussed in previous and concurrent course work using a learning-over-time model. The clinical
assignment enables students to develop and assimilate patient care skills under the direct supervision of a certified athletic
trainer and/or approved clinical instructor within the athletic training room, exposure to intercollegiate athletics and/or at
approved affiliated sites. During this course, the student will be formally evaluated by an Approved Clinical Instructor only.
This course must be taken and successfully completed in conjuction with ATR 00339 Clinical Techniques in Athletic
Training II before a student may continue matriculating through the Athletic Training Education Program.

END

ATR 00360:

Residency in Athletic Training III

Prerequisites: (ATR 00339 or PHED 35339) and (ATR 00359 or PHED 35359) Corequisite(s): ATR 00340

This clinical education course, designed for first semester seniors, will review and evaluate, within a clinical setting, those
clinical proficiencies discussed in previous and concurrent course work using a learning-over-time model. The clinical
assignment enables students to develop and assimilate patient care skills under the direct supervision of a certified athletic
trainer and/or approved clinical instructor within the athletic training room, exposure to intercollegiate athletics and/or at
approved affiliated sites. During this course, the student will be formally evaluated by an Approved Clinical Instructor only.
This course must be taken and successfully completed in conjuction with ATR 00340 Clinical Techniques in Athletic
Training III before a student may continue matriculating through the Athletic Training Education Program.

END

ATR 00361:

Residency in Athletic Training IV

Prerequisites: (ATR 00340 or PHED 35340) and (ATR 00360 or PHED 35360) Corequisite(s): ATR 00341

This clinical education course, designed for second semester seniors, will review and evaluate, within a clinical setting,
those clinical proficiencies discussed in previous and concurrent course work using a learning-over-time model. The clinical
assignment enables students to develop and assimilate patient care skills under the direct supervision of a certified athletic
trainer and/or approved clinical instructor within the athletic training room, exposure to intercollegiate athletics and/or at
approved affiliated sites. During this course, the student will be formally evaluated by an Approved Clinical Instructor only.
This course must be taken and successfully completed in conjuction with ATR 00341 Clinical Techniques in Athletic
Training III before a student may continue matriculating through the Athletic Training Education Program.

END

ATR 00405:

Organization & Administration in Athletic Training

Prerequisites: (ATR 00339 or PHED 35339)

This lecture/laboratory course is designed to meet the entry level competencies for the athletic training student in the area
of organization and administration of athletic training. It covers liability, budgeting, athletic training facility design,
insurance, administration of medical record keeping systems, data tabulation and interpretation, emergency transportation
systems, athletic training facility management, impact of state and national governing body regulations, athletic injury
insurance administration and communication, conflict resolution and mediation.
The senior level course is designed to meet educational competencies in pharmacology and general medicine for the
undergraduate athletic training student. This course will focus on issues in pharmacology and general medicine pertinent to
the allied health profession of athletic training. Issues such as the drug approval process, side effects of medications, general
medical evaluation will be explored during this course,. There is a general medical clinical field experience with the athletic
raining programs medical director associated with this course.

END

ATR 00447:

Therapeutic Modalities in Athletic Training - Laboratory Experiences

Prerequisites: (ATR 00220 or PHED 35220) Corequisite(s): ATR 00475

This laboratory course is designed to teach teh psychomotor and clinical proficiency skills necessary to develop
psychomotor skills relevant to the use of Therapeutic Modalities. This laboratory course must be taken and successfully
completed in conjuction with Therapeutic Modalities in Athletic Training before a student may continue matriculating
through the Athletic Training Education Program.

END

ATR 00475:

Therapeutic Modalities for Athletic Training

Prerequisites: (ATR 00220 or PHED 35220) and (ATR 00329 or PHED 35239)Corequisite(s): ATR 00447

This course focuses on the cognitive, affective and psychomotor competencies involved in developing appropriate
therapeutic modality programs for the injured person. This course uses current research to discuss the theory and clinical
applications of all potential modalities used in the athletic training room. This course implements a problem-solving
approach for the return of functional integrity to the injured person through the use of therapeutic modalities. A laboratory
experience is part of this class.

END

ATR 00476:

Therapeutic Exercises in Athletic Training - Laboratory Experiences

Prerequisites: (ATR 00475 or PHED 35475) Corequisite(s): ATR 00478

This laboratory course is designed to teach the psychomotor and lcinical proficiency skills necessary to develop
psychomotor skills relevant to the use of Therapeutic Excercies. This laboratory course must be taken and successfully
copleted in conjunction with Terapeutic Excercies in Athletic Training before a student may continue matriculating
through the athletic Training Education Program.

END

ATR 00477:

Psychosocial Aspects of Physical Activity

Prerequsite(s): PSY 01107 and (HES 00370 or PSY 05320)
Psychosocial Aspects of Physical Activity (ATR00477) course is designed for students in the Psychology of Sport and
Exercise Minor and Certificate of Undergraduate Study (CUGS) Program. The course draws upon theories, empirical
studies, and practical applications to help people discover the importance and significance of psychosocial aspects in
physical activity. This course will provide a theoretical foundation for exploring the relationship/interaction between
biology (brain, body systems), psychology (cognitions, emotions, and behaviors), and social factors (relationships, culture,
health policy) within the reviewed topic areas. Topics covered in this course include but are not limited to: the
biopsychosocial model, theories and techniques of interpersonal and cross-cultural communication, eating disorders and
disordered eating, substance abuse/addiction, sleep, stress, psychosocial distress, trauma (including Trauma Informed Care),
mental health concepts, suicide and self-harm, sociocultural issues, abuse and/or neglect, social support systems, response to
injury and rehabilitation, psychosocial aspects of pain, psychosocial and “complementary therapies” such as meditation,
yoga, massage, and acupuncture This course will also demand critical thinking of the research, assigned readings, and articles
that support or contradict a certain theoretical perspective/viewpoint.

END

ATR 00478:

Therapeutic Exercises in Athletic Training

Prerequsite(s): (ATR 00475 or PHED 35475) and (ATR 00447 or PHED 35447) Corequisite(s): ATR 00476

This course covers the cognitive, affective and psychomotor competencies involved in developing appropriate
rehabilitation exercise protocols for the injured person. This course uses current research to discuss the physiological and
biomechanical concepts involved in the clinical practice of rehabilitation. This course implements a holistic and
problem-solving approach for the return of functional integrity to the injured person. A laboratory experience is part of this
class.

END

ATR 00479:

Pharmacology and General Medicine in Athletic Training

Prerequisites: (ATR 00478 or PHED 35478)

This senior level course is designed to meet educational competencies in pharmacology and general medication for the
undergraduate athletic training student. The course will focus on issues in pharmacology and general medicine pertinent to
the allied health profession of athletic training. Issues such as the drug approval process, side effects of medications, general
medical evaluation will be explored during this course. There is a general medical clinical field experience with the athletic
training program's medical director associated with this course.

END

ATR 00505:

Principles in Evidence-based Practice

Prerequisites: Acceptance into the Athletic Training Program

This course addresses the role of research in professional Athletic Training practice including conduct of research,
research sources utilization and dissemination, methodology, data analysis and principles and models of evidence-based
practice.

END

ATR 00510:

Cadaver Anatomy

Prerequisites: Acceptance into the Athletic Training Program

This course offers students the opportunity to identify various structures on cadaver specimens that are related to neuro
and musculoskeletal structures and pathologies of the human body.

END

ATR 00511:

Management of Medical Emergencies

Prerequisites: Acceptance into the Athletic Training Program

This is a lecture and laboratory course that provides a comprehensive approach to the identification of risk factors,
preparation of emergency action plans, and recognition and care of emergency medical conditions including those that may
lead to sudden death. Students will gain CPR Certification upon successful completion of curricular requirements.

END

ATR 00519:

Clinical Assessment I

Prerequisites: In good standing with the Athletic Training Program

This course discusses prevention, assessment, diagnosis, and treatment approaches for patients with musculoskeletai
pathologies as it relates to the lower extremity and lumbar spine.

END

ATR 00520:

Clinical Assessment II

Prerequisites: ATR 00519

This course discusses prevention, assessment, diagnosis, and treatment approaches for patients with musculoskeletal
pathologies as it relates to the head, upper extremity, cervical and thoracic spine.

END

ATR 00521:

Clinical Assessment III

Prerequisites: ATR 00520

This course discusses knowledge, skills and abilities associated with the prevention, assessment, diagnosis, and treatment
approaches for patients with a variety of medical conditions. Students will practice the clinical skills necessary to provide
appropriate patient care within this course.

END

ATR 00524:

Injury Risk Management to Enhance Human Performance

Prerequisites: In good standing with the Athletic Training Program

This course will provide students with the knowledge, skills and abilities that relate to health care systems, injury
prevention, prophylactic strapping & bracing, and durable medical equipment. This course will also teach students how to
develop assessment plans that detect poor movement strategies and then implement corrective intervention programs to
improve movement patterns that will reduce injury risk and maximize performance.

END

ATR 00526:

Healthcare Management & Quality Improvement

Prerequisites: ATR 00531

This course will provide students with the concepts and issues related to healthcare management and quality improvement
within the clinical setting to enhance patient care. Students will learn the knowledge, skills and abilities in the areas of, but
not limited to, healthcare informatics, quality improvement, finance and reimbursement, managed care, professional and
governmental regulations, diversity within the workplace, and professional responsibility. These topics will culminate into
developing healthcare management strategies using qualitative and quantitative outcomes measures, developing healthcare
leadership & communication skills, self-assessment and facility management to advocate best clinical practice for all
stakeholders involved in patient care.

END

ATR 00530:

Pharmacology

Prerequisites: ATR 00533

This course will teach students the knowledge, skills and abilities needed to understand basic principles of pharmacology,
pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. Students will also learn the indications, contraindications, dosing, interactions
and adverse reactions of pharmacological agents in order to educate patients about medication administration while
managing their condition. This course is also designed to educate students how to administer medications using the
appropriate route upon the order of a prescribing physician and in accordance with governing pharmacological regulations.

END

ATR 00531:

Therapeutic Interventions I

Prerequisites: ATR 00519 and ATR 00524

This course will use an evidence-based approach to teach students the knowledge, skills and abilities to use physical agents
as a component in the development and implementation of plans of care designed to address a patient's impairments,
limitations and restrictions following injuries requiring both surgical and non-surgical therapeutic interventions. These
physical agents include but may not be limited to cryotherapy, thermotherapy, ultrasound therapy, electrical therapy,
diathermy, intermittent compression, traction, LASER, massage and manual therapies. Additionally, students will be taught
how to use patient-oriented and clinician-oriented outcomes to develop and adjust their plans of care to provide the most
effective healthcare.

END

ATR 00533:

Therapeutic Interventions II

Prerequisites: ATR 00531

This course will use an evidence-based approach to teach students the knowledge, skills and abilities to use rehabilitation
& reconditioning components in the development and implementation of plans of care designed to address a patient's
impairments, limitations and restrictions following injury. These concepts include but may not be limited to strength,
endurance power, restoration of flexibility and range of motion, activity specific conditioning, proprioception and balance,
and agility. Additionally, students will continue to use patient-oriented and clinician-oriented outcomes to develop and
adjust their plans of care to provide the most effective healthcare.

END

ATR 00535:

Behavioral Health

Prerequisites: ATR 00526

This course teaches the knowledge, skills and abilities needed for the Athletic Trainer to appropriately develop and
implement policies to identify patients with a behavioral health crisis (e.g., sociocultural, mental, emotional and/or physical)
and for referral to qualified providers. This course will also address the role of cultural competence among athletic trainers,
their patients, and other healthcare providers involved in developing policy, referral and plans of care that promote high
quality healthcare.

END

ATR 00537:

Residency in Athletic Training I

Prerequisites: ATR 00519

This supervised clinical experience course provides students with clinical practice opportunities. This course emphasizes
continuum of care, including the use of evidence-based practice, cultural competence, inter-professional practice,
communication, quality improvement, ethical decision- making, documentation, patient-centered care and professionalism.

END

ATR 00538:

Residency in Athletic Training II

Prerequisites: ATR 00520

This clinical experience course continues to provide students with clinical practice opportunities using increased
supervised clinical decision-making autonomy. This course also continues to emphasize continuum of care, including the use
of evidence-based practice, cultural competence, inter-professional practice, communication, quality improvement, ethical
decision- making, documentation, patient-centered care and professionalism.

END

ATR 00540:

Fellowship in Athletic Training I

Prerequisites: ATR 00539

This clinical course will allow students to have an immersive experience in which to practice clinical skills under supervised
clinical decision- making autonomy. This course emphasizes continuum of care, including the use of evidence-based
practice, cultural competence, inter-professional practice, communication, quality improvement, ethical decision- making,
documentation, patient-centered care and professionalism.

END

ATR 00541:

Fellowship in Athletic Training II

Prerequisites: ATR 00540

This course is the culmination of all clinical experiences. Students practice clinical skills during a full semester of
supervised immersive clinical education experiences with the greatest amount of supervised autonomy. This course
emphasizes continuum of care, including the use of evidence-based practice, cultural competence, inter-professional
practice, communication, quality improvement, ethical decision- making, documentation, patient-­centered care and
professionalism.

END

ATR 00560:

Capstone in Clinical Reasoning I

Prerequisites: ATR 00535

This course will provide the student, under the guidance of their advisor, the opportunity to develop a clinical/research
question and methodology, data analysis and interpretation that leads to a research project that will enhance the Athletic
Training profession. In addition, this course will be used to assess the student's competence to practice Athletic Training.
Course will include a Master's Comprehensive Exam to assess Athletic Training skills.

END

ATR 00561:

Capstone in Clinical Reasoning II

Prerequisites: ATR 00560

This course is a continuation of ATR00560 Capstone in Clinical Reasoning I. The student will prepare their research
project for a culminating presentation in preparation for submission to a scholarly journal.

END

ATR 00570:

Seminar in Healthcare Inter-professional Education & Practice

Prerequisites: ATR 00540 or NUT 00530 or NURS 03303

This seminar course will provide students from various health care disciplines to work together to develop skills needed to
engage in inter-professional collaborative practice. Students will complete pre-work online and then attend virtual meetings
with other healthcare disciplines to develop care plans for patient cases. Specific, but not limited to, areas of study include
ethics for inter-professional practice, roles and responsibilities of health care providers, inter-professional communication
strategies and developing quality health care teams to enhance patient outcomes.

END

HES 00100:

Teaching Concepts of Driver Education

Prerequisites: (ATR 00235 or PHED 35235) and (HPE 00325 or HLTH 37325) or (ATR 00235 or PHED 35235) and (HPE 00326 or HLTH 37326)

The course is designed for individuals seeking New Jersey Driver Education teacher endorsement. The content includes
learning to teach motor vehicle operation, driving environment and the student development of teaching techniques
emphasizing safety, risk perception, and decision-making prcesses applied in a vehicle. Learning how to instruct others in
performing behind-the-wheel driving will be scheduled outside of class time.

END

HES 00116:

Safety First Aid Basic Understanding of Athletic Injuries

Prerequisites: Acceptance into one of the following programs; Athletic Training, Health Promotion and Fitness Management, or
Health and Physical Education Teacher Certification.

This course is designed for the individual who is interested in gaining CPR and First Aid certification and a basic
understanding of athletic injuries. The first part of this class will allow students to understand and demonstrate appropriate
techniques in performing American Red Cross Community CPR and First Aid techniques required for certification. The
second component of the class will enable students to understand basic concepts in athletic injury: anatomy, recognition,
and basic care.

END

HES 00345:

Exercise Physiology (with lab)

Prerequisites: (HES 00241 and HES 00242) or (BIOL 10210 and BIOL 10212), all with a grade of C- or higher.

A course in applied anatomy and physiology, this course studies the interrelationship of exercise and physiology. This
course also covers the functions of the human body under the stress of physical activity.

END

HES 00401:

Exercise Prescription

Prerequisites: HES 00345 OR HES 00349 with a minimum grade of C-

This course provides students with the knowledge and practical experience in exercise testing and prescription. It enables
students to establish scientific foundations of exercise testing and prescription, identify risk factors for disease and
prescribe exercise programs based on exercise test results and personal limitations. Practical experiences are provided for
testing subjects in the laboratory. The course prepares students for professional exercise certifications.

END

HES 00510:

Advanced Technology in School Health Education and Physical Education

This course is designed to provide students with knowledge, skills, and tools to effectively implement technology in Health
and Physical Education. This course will include computer functionality, technology equipment, software, and apps
applicable to Health and Physical Education.

END

HES 00515:

Driver Education Concepts and Theory

The course is designed for currently certified teachers seeking New Jersey Driver Education teacher endorsement. The
content includes learning to teach motor vehicle operation, driving environment and the student development of teaching
techniques emphasizing safety, risk perception, and decision-making processes applied in a vehicle. Learning how to instruct
others in performing behind-the-wheel driving will be scheduled outside of class time.

END

HES 00520:

Exercise and Epidemiology

This course examines the etiology and pathophysiology of certain diseases and specifically includes the role of exercise as a
preventative measure in the onset of these diseases. Disease processes investigated are coronary artery and coronary heart
disease, hypertension, Type 2 diabetes mellitus, obesity, osteoporosis, selected cancers and low back pain syndrome.

END

HES 00521:

Contemporary Issues in School Health Education and Physical Education

This course is designed to provide an opportunity for observation, description and direct discussion of new trends, issues
and polices that affect School Health Education and Physical Education, including international and national standards and
curricular frameworks, current trends in delivery of programs and pedagogy, and international, national and state/local
policies or mandates that affect the status and delivery of School Health Education and physical education in public schools.

END

HES 00525:

Curriculum Strategies In Substance Awareness Education

Prerequisites: PSY 05502

This course provides students with the knowledge, resources and skills needed to plan and organize curricula in chemical
health education which meet the needs of students in school and non-school based settings. Students evaluate the nature
and scope of the substance abuse problem in order to make informed decisions in the development, organization,
implementation and evaluation of substance abuse programs. Special attention is given to program and policy development,
instructional strategies, program evaluation, staff development, and the dynamics of school culture.

END

HES 00530:

Advanced Instructional Strategies in School Health Education

The course examines the many creative and innovative strategies used by school health teachers. Instructional planning
will be the key focus. The class will look at the importance of national and state standards, teaching philosophy, health
literacy, and strategies for and assessment of instruction.

END

HES 00540:

Advanced Instructional Strategies in Physical Education

This course examines the key factors and skills that contribute to teaching physical education effectively across all grade
levels and ability groups. Specific topics include Understanding by Design concepts, Teaching and Learning styles,
Curriculum/Unit/Lesson Design, Teaching Modifications for Challenging Environments, and Disposition Impact on
Teacher Effectiveness.

END

HES 00541:

Advanced Assessment in School Health Education

This course focuses on theories of Assessment, Measurement and Evaluation as it is applied to School Health Education.
Specific details will focus on how to develop and implement course related assessments along with how to evaluate student
achievement in a variety of ways. Additional emphasis will address program assessment along with teacher assessment as it is
related to teaching Health Education in the P–12 school setting.

END

HES 00555:

Individual Study in Health and Physical Education

This course is designed to give the student the opportunity to pursue an in-depth inquiry into a selected topic in health and
physical education on an individualized basis. It provides flexibility for the student in increasing specialization in a selected
area of interest. Offered in summer session only for matriculated students with a minimum of 25 S.H. completed. Students
must submit a written proposal for individual study to the program advisor by March 15 prior to the summer session desired.

END

HES 00560:

Advanced Assessment in Physical Education

This course provides advanced instruction in principles, concepts and forms of assessment in physical education. It is
designed to provide a basic understanding of statistics to Health and Physical Education graduate students. Assessment
alignment with teacher evaluation models and student learning outcomes will be discussed. Project based learning will be
incorporated that includes how to plan and implement a unit assessment and analyze and interpret the data.

END

HES 00570:

Teaching School Health Education and Physical Education to Students with
Disabilities

In this course, students acquire the knowledge and instructional strategies needed to plan and implement an effective and
inclusive Health and Physical Education program for students with disabilities ages 3–21. The course will include
assessments, school and community collaborations, instructional strategies for self-contained and inclusion classes, and
resources for activity modifications and information on disabilities.

END

HLT 00103:

Health and Wellness

This course stresses the concepts of lifetime health and physical fitness. It examines the positive effects of exercise upon
the heart and blood vessels, obesity and proper diet, body mechanics, and how the body handles stress. The course also
examines the negative effects of disease, including socially transmitted diseases, substance abuse including narcotics, alcohol
and tobacco, and other contemporary health-related problems. Students learn to analyze their strengths and limitations
while planning a personal wellness profile which best fits their needs and interest.

END

HLT 00170:

Stress Management

This course focuses on the nature of stress and the impact it has on a person's health. The student will study the
relationship of the physiological, psychological and social factors which contribute to one's general stress balance and
develop life skills to combat the negative impact of stress.

END

HLT 00200:

Introduction to Public Health and Wellness

Community and Public Health examines the trends and components of the community health field. This course prepares
students for the additional courses in the Community Health Advocacy and Education program. Topics include foundations
of community health, epidemiology, health of the nation, community mental health, environmental health and occupational
safety.

END

HLT 00227:

Consumer Health Decisions

This course examines the rights and responsibilities of a consumer faced with increasing amounts of information related to
his or her overall well-being. It examines the major problem of health fraud and the components of scientific research. The
role of advertising is explored, as well as sound principles for purchasing nutrition, fitness and other health-related products
and services. Students learn important concepts related to health insurance and hospitals, traditional and alternative medical
care and how to better manage the decisions they make.

END

HLT 00262:

Drugs, Alcohol, and Tobacco

This course is designed to examine in depth the use and abuse of drugs, alcohol and tobacco including the origins and
current status of use. Topics include types of drugs, physiological and psychological impact, assessment, monitoring and
prevention programs. Federal and state laws are considered and drug policy is examined. Furthermore, the societal impact of
drug use and abuse is examined. The content considers the topic from a health professional’s position and is specific to the
profession of wellness education.

END

HLT 00301:

Health and Diverse Populations

The goal of this course is to enable students to understand the powerful influence of social, economic, geographic and
demographic factors on the health-related attitudes, beliefs and actions of individuals and communities. Students explore
the concepts of health literacy, health disparities, and the impact of public policy on the health status of different
populations from a social justice perspective. Social Capital is explored as a model for effectively improving the health status
of diverse populations.

END

HLT 00303:

Environmental Issues and Health

This course exposes students to environmental health risks impact on human health. Students will examine the
relationship of lifestyle and the ability of the planet to sustain us. Students are introduced to conceptual definitions for
environmental health and hazards that impact human health. The importance of establishing and enforcing standards (local,
federal, occupational) which protect employees, communities, and the environment will be considered. Students will explore
areas in infectious disease, toxicology, environmental risk assessment, occupational safety, waste management, pollution,
and sustainability. Students will understand the importance of effective risk communication strategies/approaches and
advocacy for policies and laws that protect the future well being of our planet.

END

HLT 00344:

US Health Care Systems

This course provides an overview of public health’s role in healthcare history, delivery, financing and policy in the United
States. Governmental agencies roles and policies and healthcare statistics are considered as the shape public health.

END

HLT 00501:

Seminar in Promoting Health Justice

This course provides students with a critical analysis of health justice and causal factors that perpetuate health inequities.
Students will learn about legal, structural, and justice issues underlying health disparities. They will examine current safety
net programs and legal protections affecting the health of vulnerable populations. Finally, they will apply concrete strategies
for change and health justice promotion through case study analyses.

END

HLT 00504:

Methods and Applications of Data Analytics in Community Health

In this course, students will learn the language and process of data analytic methods in search of trends to answer questions
relevant to population health. Specifically, students will learn the sources of data, how this data is aggregated and analyzed
and how to use the data to guide evidence-based practice and policy formation. Ethical issues surrounding data management
and application will also be addressed.

END

HLT 00505:

Historical and Social Perspectives in Health Disparities

This course focuses on the historical perspectives of health disparities. Students will focus attention on the investigation
on the fundamental and root causes of inequity in the United States. Students will examine the empirical evidence to
evaluate how historic policies and interventions in the United States have impacted groups differently. Societal and social
factors that influence and impact health disparities will be evaluated.

END

HLT 00550:

Capstone Project

Prerequisites: This course must be taken in the last semester of the program.

In this independent study course, students will work individually with a faculty advisor to complete a major project
relevant to health promotion. Projects may include the development of curriculum, program development, program
evaluation, a research thesis, or other project with the approval of the Wellness and Lifestyle Management faculty
coordinator.

END

HLTH 37530:

Leadership And Management In Health Promotion Programs

END

HPW 00340:

Program Planning & Leadership in Health Promotion & Wellness

Prerequisites: (HPW 00350 or HLTH 37350)

This course identifies and explains the components of a successful health promotion and fitness program. Students learn
how to conduct a needs assessment, set goals and objectives, design intervention strategies, promote the program, find
resources, prepare a budget and evaluate a program. In addition, students sharpen their professional skills related to public
speaking, time management and business writing.

END

HPW 00350:

Health Behavior Theory and Counseling

Prerequisites: HPW 00210 or HLT 00200 or NUT 00230 or HES 00105

This course examines the factors that influence an individual's choices and behaviors related to health and the process of
motivating change within the individual to adopt healthful behaviors and discontinue unhealthful ones. Several theories of
health behavior are examined and applied. The different roles of the client and educator are addressed as the student is
prepared to counsel others in making positive health behavior changes.

END

HPW 00360:

Facility & Program Management in Wellness

Prerequisites: HPW 00210

This course examines the skills necessary to effectively manage a health promotion facility and program through the study
of the health and fitness facility management industry. Topics include training and managing staff, marketing programs and
services, customer service, financial management, legal concerns, equipment selection and health and safety issues.

END

NUT 00200:

Basic Nutrition

Students study human nutrition through the basic knowledge of nutrients and the physiological processes involved in the
utilization of food. They also develop an understanding of the ways in which age, health, social, and economic factors and
other variables affect nutritional needs and food practices. A computerized dietary analysis may be one of the course
requirements.

END

NUT 00415:

Nutrition for Fitness

Prerequisites: Undergraduate level NUT 00200 Minimum Grade of C and BIOL 10210 minimum grade of C- and BIOL 10212 minimum grade of a C-

This advanced nutrition course explores the relationship between nutrition, physical fitness, performance and disease
prevention. Specific topics include nutrition fraud, supplementation, ergogenic aids, diet planning for athletes and the
relationship between nutrition and chronic diseases such as cancer and heart disease. In addition, students continue to
develop their skills as nutrition counselors and educators.

END

NUT 00500:

Advanced Nutritional Assessment

Prerequisites: Must be accepted into the M.S. in Nutrtitionand Dietetics program and in the fifth (graduate) year ofthe program.

This graduate level course will expands upon the nutritional assessment skills of dietetics students to enable them to
perform a complete client assessment. Students will learn to assess lifestyle habits, health risks, dietary intake, biometric
measurements, and results of blood, stool, saliva and urine laboratory tests. Students will integrate assessment data into a
comprehensive analysis and development of a meal plan for a client. Client confidentiality, data management and follow-up
nutrition counseling skills will also be addressed throughout the course.

END

NUT 00501:

Nutrition Research Seminar

Admission to the MS in Nutrition and Dietetics

This course provides students with the opportunity to participate in nutrition related research and practice the skills in a
variety of research settings. Essential components of research methods including qualitative and quantitative interventions,
screening and cleaning data, and IRB applications will be presented in the seminar. Students will perform hands on
techniques to complement topics covered in HES 00301 Research Methods. The role of nutrition research in evidenced
based practice will be emphasized through projects and activities throughout the seminar.

END

NUT 00510:

Advanced Topics in Public Health Nutrition

Prerequisites: Earn a grade of C or higher in NUT 00410

This course has students explore the relationship between nutrition, wellness and disease prevention. Students will
examine the interaction between the physical and social environment, lifestyle habits and biological factors in determining
the health status of a population and the role nutrition plays in addressing them. The development, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of nutrition programs and research needed to address current public health issues will be
explored throughout the course.

END

NUT 00511:

Advanced Nutrition Therapy

This course provides students with an in-depth discussion of advanced medical nutrition therapy topics including pediatric
nutrition, sports nutrition, and eating disorders. Students enrolled in this course will integrate the advanced medical
nutrition therapy to achieve proficient knowledge and skills in the field. Critical thinking and problem solving will be
required to complete projects and activities in pediatrics, sports and eating disorders as it pertains to medical nutrition
therapy.

END

NUT 00518:

Nutrition and Epidemiology

This course is designed to enable students to explore nutrition's role in the prevention and rehabilitation of a variety of
diseases including: hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, obesity, arthritis, osteoporosis, and
cancer. The course will explore the etiology and progression of these diseases and facilitate an understanding of how
nutrition may be prescribed for the care of individuals with these diseases. A portion of the course will be devoted to
analyzing case studies and guiding the student through the process of nutritional management. Students will be required to
perform a review of literature on a specific disease, which they will then present to the class.

END

NUT 00520:

Supervised Practice

Prerequisites: Must be accepted into the Coordinated Program i Dietetics and in the graduate year of the program

This course provides the first half of the required 1000-hour supervised practice experience in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for eligibility for taking the national examination for the Registered Dietitian/Nutritionist credential.
Students will be assigned to an affiliated learning site and will complete 500 hours of clinical service in a healthcare facility,
community health center, school setting, and a food service facility.

END

NUT 00530:

Medical Nutrition Therapy Supervised Practice

Prerequisites: Must be accepted into the Coordinated Program in Dietetics and in the graduate year of the program

This course provides the second half of the required 1000-hour supervised practice experience in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for eligibility for taking the national examination for the Registered Dietitian/Nutritionist credential.
Students will be assigned to an affiliated learning site and will complete 500 hours of clinical service in a healthcare facility,
community health center, school setting, and a food service facility.

END

NUT 00540:

Metabolic Basis of Disease

This course provides students with an in-depth review of the biochemical and physiological bases of macronutrient and
micronutrient metabolism and their regulation in humans, as well as body weight regulation and its metabolic
underpinnings. The primary focus of the course will be aimed at tissue-specific metabolism involving carbohydrates, lipids,
proteins, and micronutrients and how inborn errors of metabolism result in diseases that have nutritional implications with
regard to their cause and treatment.

END

WLM 00512:

Understanding and Applying the Professional Literature in HES

This course provides an overview of the research methods used in the health and exercise science field with an emphasis on
reading, interpreting and applying the research findings in practical settings. The course will include an overview of both
quantitative and qualitative research methods, as well as the steps of the research process. Students will learn how to
perform a literature review, conduct a program evaluation and other practical applications of the research process.

END

WLM 00530:

Leadership and Management in Health Promotion Programs

This course covers a variety of leadership issues necessary for ascending from a clinical position to an administrative or
management position in a health profession. The general principle are applicable regardless of whether the goal is to ascend
into a formal large institution(e.g., hospital), smaller institutional practice, healthcare corporation, private practice, or
educational institution setting; basically any healthcare setting where one may have employees to work with or manage.
Students are expected to: Participate actively by sharing their own personal experiences in the healthcare setting, provide
analysis or critique of various situations presented, and integrate the material learned to answer a comprehensive question at
the end of the semester as if they are the leader in an appropriate organizational setting.

END

WLM 00541:

Wellness Coaching and Behavior Change

This course will provide practitioners with the theoretical background and tools needed to effect positive lifestyle changes
in individual clients and population groups. Students will learn to use a wellness coaching delivery model that is based on
empirically-supported health behavior theories, such as Social Cognitive Theory and the Transtheoretical Model, to support
and motivate lasting behavior change.

END

WLM 00542:

Program Planning in Health Promotion

This course provides an overview of leading health program planning theories, including PRECEDE/PROCEED and
Intervention Mapping, and the application of these theories in the most common health promotion settings. The program
planning process will be discussed in detail and case studies will be used to demonstrate the successful application of this
process.

END

WLM 00575:

Wellness in the Workplace

Wellness in the Workplace examines overall management of wellness programs and facilities, with an emphasis on human
resource management. In this case, wellness professionals will enhance their knowledge and application of how these
elements that can be applied to wellness management settings. Topics include organizational structure, training, and
managing staff, funding worksite health promotion programs, financial management, legal and ethical concerns, strategies
for program promotion and customer service relations.

END

WLM 00580:

Obesity and Diabetes Prevention and Management

Prerequisites: (NUT 00200 or INAR 06200) and (BIOL 10211 or BIOL 10212)

The purpose of this course is to examine the most common diseases afflicting Americans which have exercise as one of its
primary modes for prevention and rehabilitation. The course will thoroughly review the underlying causes for each disease
and provide the student with a complete understanding of how exercise can be used in combating these diseases. The
primary areas of focus will be cardiovascular, pulmonary and metabolic disorders.

END

WLM 00590:

Integrating Wellness Into School Settings

This course addresses the growing demand for wellness initiatives for students, their families and staff in P through 12
school settings. Teachers, school nurses, school administrators and community health promotion professionals will
understand how to build wellness programming into the school community.

END

WLM 00600:

Promoting Human Wellness Across the Lifespan

This course introduces and examines the dimensions of wellness as well as an ecological approach to health and wellness.
Students will be exposed to personal, social, and environmental factors that influence health and wellbeing. The course
provides a conceptual framework with which to understand the interrelationships between people and the encompassing
world in which they live, work, and play.

END

WLM 00610:

Positive Perceptions & Performance Wellness

Prerequisites: None

This course is designed to provide students with knowledge of core concepts from positive psychology and the strengths
movement from the perspective of wellness philosophy. Students will explore ways in which positive perceptions can be
used to help target populations achieve personal and work life satisfaction. Students will develop competency in applied
interventions in workplace, school, clinical and community settings to enhance wellness, productivity and performance.
This course addresses work and life satisfaction, important drivers of health, by incorporating the fields of positive
psychology and wellness.

END

WLM 00620:

Internship in Wellness and Lifestyle Management

Prerequisites: Students must have completed 27 semester hours in the program.

The goal of this course is to provide graduate students in Wellness and Lifestyle Management with an opportunity to apply
the professional knowledge they have gained in their coursework to a professional setting. In addition to participating in the
daily operation of the site, the student will complete a major project which incorporated two or more of the professional
skills s/he has learned in the coursework of the program.

END

WLM 00621:

Practicum in Wellness Coaching

Prerequisites: WLM 00541 and WLM 00600 and WLM 00580

Practicum in Wellness Coaching is the final course in a four-course sequence designed to prepare students to sit for the
National Board Certification in Wellness Coaching through the ICHWC and National Board of Medical Examiners. This
is not an online course; students must be able to come to the Rowan campus to complete it. The primary emphasis of this
course is to provide students with a minimum of 20 hours of coaching experience under the supervision of a faculty advisor.
Students will meet individually with the faculty advisor on three separate occasions to review specific coaching sessions and
receive feedback on how they can improve their coaching skills. In addition, the course will cover topics including how to
structure and manage a coaching practice and ethical/legal considerations for coaches.

END

HIST 05100:

The West in the World to 1600

This course examines the entanglements of European peoples and nations in the region and wider world before 1600. It
emphasizes cultural, social, intellectual, political and economic transformations, and interactions with other parts of the
world from neolithic times to the 17th century. This course introduces students to the principles and methodology of
history.

END

HIST 05101:

The West in the World since 1600

This course examines the entanglements of European peoples and nations in the region and wider world after 1600. It
emphasizes cultural, social, intellectual, political and economic transformations, and interactions with other parts of the
world from the 17th century to the present. This course introduces students to the principles and methodology of history.

END

HIST 05120:

World History Since 1500

This course studies the key changes in the patterns of interaction among the major cultures of the earth from the
beginnings of European Expansion in the 1500's. The course covers the roots of European Expansion, the response of the
Confucian, modern, and non-Eurasian cultures, and the emergence of a non-Western Third World Block since 1914.

END

HIST 05150:

United States To 1865

This course examines the historical roots of the American democratic traditions, with the emphasis on understanding the
political, social and cultural forces developed in the new physical setting of North American and finally welded into a unified
nation.

END

HIST 05151:

United States Since 1865

This course analyzes the principal political, social and cultural factors conditioning the life of the nation since the Civil
War. It emphasizes the issues facing modern America with the impact of industrialization and the problems of world
leadership.

END

HIST 05306:

Historical Methods-WI

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course offers intensive training in the techniques of historical research and analysis of historical writing. Required of
History majors as prerequisite for other upper-level courses.

END

HIST 05492:

Seminar

Prerequisites: Senior Status and HIST 05306 w/C- or better, at least 9 credits in 300-400 level history courses.

This course concentrates on a research paper of substantial length based upon primary as well as secondary sources. The
course also requires critical analysis and discussion of the papers by seminar participants. Required of History majors during
their senior year.

END

HIST 05500:

Colloquium In American History

This course introduces students to in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in American history, including work
with historical sources, critical reading of historians' accounts, intensive research and writing, and class discussion. Proposed
topics include American Immigration History, Colonial North America (1500-1775), The American Revolution and Early
Republic (1763-1820), Comparative History of the Americas, and Modern American and European Women in Historical
Perspective.

END

HIST 05506:

Research Methods in History

This course is an intensive introduction to research methods for historians, designed for graduate students who have never
had extensive preparation in historical methods or whose skills need refreshing and updating. The course focuses on
working with historical sources, an introduction to historiography including critical reading of historians’ accounts, an
immersion in research and writing skills for advanced students of history including working with on-line databases, and class
discussion.

END

HIST 05510:

Readings and Research in Global History

This course is on of two courses, along with Readings and Research in History II, designed to strengthen the skills of
students in historical research, writing, and analysis. It will expose students to key recent theoretical influences on
professional historians, cover key developments in historiography from ancient times through the beginning of the
twentieth century, and provide students with brief surveys of the major issues, including both classic and contemporary
debates, within regionalized subfields of European and Global history. The course will provide students with opportunities
for peer presentations, discussion, and leadership not necessarily available in other graduate courses. This course is required
for all students enrolled in the Master's program in History and is a prerequisite for 600 level graduate courses but not for
other 500 level graduate courses, including Readings and Research in History II. This course is usually offered once a year.

END

HIST 05511:

Colloquium in American History I

This course is the first graduate colloquium on the topic of American history that students in this program will take. The
course focuses on the in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in American history, including work with historical
sources, critical reading of historians' accounts, intensive research and writing, and class discussion. Proposed topics include
American Immigration History, Colonial North America, 1500-1775, the American Revolution and Early Republic,
1775-1820, Comparative History of the Americas, and Modern American and European Women in Historical Perspective.

END

HIST 05512:

Readings and Research In History II

Prerequisites: Admission to BA/MA or MA program in History

This course is one of two courses, along with Readings and Research in History I (HIST 05.510), designed to strengthen
the skills of students in historical research, writing, and analysis. It will expose students to key recent theoretical influences
on professional historians, cover key developments in historiography during the twentieth century, and provide students
with brief surveys of the major issues, including both classic and contemporary debates, within the regionalized subfields of
United States history. The course will provide students with opportunities for peer presentations, discussion, and leadership
not necessarily available in other graduate courses. This course is required for all students enrolled in the Master's program
in History and is a prerequisite for 600 level graduate courses but not for other 500 level graduate courses, including
Readings and Research in History I (HIST 05.510). This course is usually offered once a year.

END

HIST 05514:

Colloquium in American History II

Prerequisites: HIST 05511

This course is the second graduate colloquium on the topic of American history that students in this program will take. For
course topics, see HIST 05515 (Colloquium in American History I).

END

HIST 05516:

Colloquium in American History III

Prerequisites: HIST 05511 and HIST 05114

This course is the third graduate colloquium on the topic of American history that students in this program will take.
Otherwise, the course is identical to Colloquium in American History I

END

HIST 05519:

Political and Social Movements in the US

This course will introduce students to the history of social and political movements in the United States to demonstrate
how diverse organizations and major figures have challenged institutional discrimination. Students will learn how
marginalized groups have sought varied ways to challenge prejudice, implicit bias, and oppressive power structures, using a
historical, political, and social lens to understand racism, sexism, heterosexism, classism, ethnocentrisms, and religious
intolerance. Students will use these lenses to assess contemporary actions to alleviate inequity.

END

HIST 05522:

Colloquium in European History I

This course is the first graduate colloquium on the topic of European history that students in this program will take. The
course focuses on in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in European history that students in this program will take.
The course focuses on in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in European history, including work with historical
sources, critical reading of historians' accounts, intensive research and writing, and class discussion. Proposed topics include
Ancient Historians, The French Revolution, The Holocaust in Europe, Popular Culture in Early Modern Europe, Social
History of Early Modern Europe, 20th Century War and Society, Women in Early Modern Europe, and Modern American
and European Women in Historical Perspective.

END

HIST 05523:

Colloquium in European History II

Prerequisites: HIST 05522

This course is the second graduate colloquium on the topic of European history that students in this program will take.
Otherwise, it is identical to Colloquium in European History I.

END

HIST 05524:

Colloquium in European History III

Prerequisites: HIST 05523

This course is the third graduate colloquium on the topic of European history that students in this program will take.
Otherwise, the course is identical to Colloquium in European History I.

END

HIST 05531:

Colloquium in Global History I

This course is the first graduate colloquium on the topic of global history that students in this program will take. The
course focuses on in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in global history, including work with historical sources,
critical reading of historians' accounts, intensive research and writing, and class discussion. Proposed areas of specialization
include Africa, Asia, Eastern Europe, and the Middle East.

END

HIST 05533:

Colloquium in Global History II

Prerequisites: HIST 05531

This course is the second graduate colloquium on the topic of global history students in this program will take. Otherwise,
the course is identical to Colloquium in Global History I.

END

HIST 05535:

Colloquium in Global History III

Prerequisites: HIST 05533

This course is the third graduate colloquium on the topic of global history students in this program will take. Otherwise,
the course is identical to Colloquium in Global History I.

END

HIST 05545:

History of Crime

Prerequisites: Graduate or senior status

This course examines crime in historical perspective, as a window into both social history and shifting approaches to
historical study. Graduate students will work in-depth with analysis of both primary and secondary source materials.

END

HIST 05551:

Graduate Independent Study

Prerequisites: matriculation in the Master of Arts in History program

Students may complete up to 6 elective credits through the independent study option if they wish to pursue specialized
knowledge not available through regular coursework. Students must take at least one colloquium related to the topic before
engaging in independent study, then develop an individual study proposal with a full-time professor in the History
Department. The proposal must be approved by the graduate coordinator prior to enrollment in the course.

END

HIST 05561:

Early American History Seminar

This course introduces students to in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in Early American history, including
work with historical sources, critical reading of historians’ accounts, intensive research and writing, and class discussion.

END

HIST 05562:

Nineteenth Century American History Seminar

This course introduces students to in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in Nineteenth Century American
history, including work with historical sources, critical reading of historians’ accounts, intensive research and writing, and
class discussion.

END

HIST 05563:

Twentieth Century American History Seminar

This course introduces students to in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in Twentieth Century American history,
including work with historical sources, critical reading of historians’ accounts, intensive research and writing, and class
discussion.

END

HIST 05571:

Ancient Mediterranean History Seminar

This course introduces students to in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in Ancient Mediterranean history,
including work with historical sources, critical reading of historians’ accounts, intensive research and writing, and class
discussion.

END

HIST 05572:

Medieval and Early Modern European History Seminar

This course introduces students to in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in Medieval or Early Modern European
history, including work with historical sources, critical reading of historians’ accounts, intensive research and writing, and
class discussion.

END

HIST 05573:

Modern European History Seminar

This course introduces students to in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in Modern European history, including
work with historical sources, critical reading of historians’ accounts, intensive research and writing, and class discussion.

END

HIST 05581:

African History Seminar

This course introduces students to in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in African history, including work with
historical sources, critical reading of historians’ accounts, intensive research and writing, and class discussion.

END

HIST 05582:

Middle Eastern History Seminar

This course introduces students to in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in Middle Eastern history, including
work with historical sources, critical reading of historians’ accounts, intensive research and writing, and class discussion.

END

HIST 05583:

Russian History Seminar

This course introduces students to in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in Russian history, including work with
historical sources, critical reading of historians’ accounts, intensive research and writing, and class discussion.

END

HIST 05584:

Latin American History Seminar

This course introduces students to in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in Latin American history, including
work with historical sources, critical reading of historians’ accounts, intensive research and writing, and class discussion.

END

HIST 05585:

East Asian History Seminar

This course introduces students to in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in East Asian history, including work
with historical sources, critical reading of historians’ accounts, intensive research and writing, and class discussion.

END

HIST 05586:

South and Southeast Asian History Seminar

This course introduces students to in-depth historical analysis of a selected theme in South and Southeast Asian history,
including work with historical sources, critical reading of historians’ accounts, intensive research and writing, and class
discussion.

END

HIST 05601:

Master's Thesis in History I

Prerequisites: HIST 05510 and HIST 05512

This course requires students to design and begin implementing their own research project to be used to satisfy the
program's thesis requirement. Under the guidance of a member of the History Department faculty who agrees to serve as
Thesis Advisor, the student will develop a Research Prospectus for their thesis that will consist of an Introduction and
Statement of the Problem, a Literature Review, and a brief summary of the proposed research. The student will defend the
prospectus before at least two History Department faculty. Prerequisites are two courses in historiography and research
methods, Readings and Research in History I (HIST 05.501) and Readings and Research in History II (HIST 05.502). The
student will begin implementing the research after obtaining the Committee's approval.

END

HIST 05602:

Master's Thesis in History II

Prerequisites: HIST05510 and HIST 05512 and HIST 05601

In Masters Thesis in History II, the student will write and complete a Masters Thesis. In Masters Thesis in History I
(HIST 05.601), the student will have designed and begun implementing their own research project. In this course, under the
guidance of a member of the History Department faculty who has agreed to serve as Thesis Advisor, the student will
complete the writing of the Thesis. The thesis should, like other graduate courses, engage students in critical reading of
historical accounts and provide them with opportunities to reconstruct historical events from original documents, conduct
research that is based on primary sources and applies historical methodologies, and write coherent historical analysis.

END

CASE 90510:

Power & Privilege: The Social Construction of Difference

This course is situated within a framework of sociopolitical development, informed by a range of critical theoretical
perspectives, and advanced by an understanding of the nature of both individual and systemic change. Student will explore
how institutions, social systems and individual experiences create and sustain systems of power and privilege that ensure
access for some while excluding others. Students will begin to develop a critical understanding of the cultural, political,
economic, and the institutional forces that perpetuate systems of privilege and oppression, and to develop a critical
consciousness, reflective practice, and commitment to action in relation to the policy, curriculum, pedagogy, and practices
they employ.

END

CASE 90520:

Participatory Research Methods in Context

This course will introduce students to participatory research methods and decolonizing research methods, including
Youth Participatory Action Research (YPAR), Feminist Participatory Action Research (FPAR), Participatory Action
Research (PAR), community engaged scholarship, program evaluation, and design based research. Students will study
current examples of this work, design and conduct a study in their professional context.

END

CASE 90521:

Ethnography in Urban Settings

This course focuses on ethnography as an approach to research in education that enables the researcher to explore culture
or cultural phenomena using detailed, in-depth methods. Students will consider the unique insights that ethnography offers
into key issues in urban education.

END

CASE 90530:

Curriculum Theories in Urban Education

This course is designed for pre-service and in-service teachers currently working in classroom settings and addresses
curriculum theory and basic principles of curriculum and instruction. Through the lenses of curriculum theories and
ideologies, students will examine their own curricular beliefs, from where they came, and how they affect how they teach
and what they teach. Students will work to understand how curricular orientations can affect the experiences of our students
and of ourselves. Using theoretically-oriented lenses, students will also examine the following: race and multicultural issues;
curricular accountability on student achievement, teacher retention, and teacher burnout; and students’ social class as a
possible explanation for achievement.

END

CASE 90534:

Disability Studies

This course explores critical approaches to dis/ability and in/exclusion, including an analysis of shifting social and cultural
constructions of dis/ability through an interdisciplinary exploration of autobiography, narrative, film, legal and policy issues
and research literature.

END

CURR 29515:

Introduction To Planning And Teaching

Students will begin their development of the skills necessary to enhance the planning, teaching, and learning processes.
Students will be expected to ground their future classroom practice in a strong research base through a study of planning and
teaching models and the latest literature on effective teaching.

END

CURR 29550:

Public School Curriculum K-12

A course that deals with a critical appraisal of current public school curriculum practices. Emphasis will be placed on the
following aspects of the K-12 curriculum: the subject matter curriculum, the humanistic curriculum, role of subject matter
specialist, the nature of the disciplines, the taxonomies of educational objectives (affective, cognitive, psychomotor). This is
a basic course which is a prerequisite for any further study in curriculum. This course may not be offered annually.

END

CURR 29590:

Curriculum Evaluation

Emphasis will be on identification, organization, and practical applications of selected curriculum evaluation models. This
course is designed to enable a student, or a team of students, to determine what and when to evaluate, whom to evaluate, and
how to evaluate. Students will be expected to demonstrate a knowledge base in curriculum theory and development. A
curriculum evaluation project is required. This course may not be offered annually.

END

CURR 29600:

Specialization Seminar And Investigation I

The student must complete a special project in the field of specialization which demonstrates his ability to apply theory
and research. Focuses upon applying general and specialized knowledge to the examination of proposals and research on the
processes of change and innovation.

END

CURR 29601:

Specialization Seminar And Investigation II

The student must complete a special project in the field of specialization which demonstrates his ability to apply theory
and research. Focuses upon applying general and specialized knowledge to the examination of proposals and research on the
processes of change and innovation.

END

ECED 23211:

Seminar: Principles and Pedagogies in the Inclusive Classroom

Prerequisites: Admission into Early Childhood Program; Corequisite: INCL 02210

This Seminar course serves as the vehicle for domain-specific application of the principles and pedagogies that promotes
the use of positive management techniques supportive of all learners in an inclusive setting. Through case study scenarios,
videos, virtual, and live field experiences, students will have multiple opportunities to reflect on and apply new learning to
enhance their understanding of proactive behavior strategies and supports.

END

ECED 23320:

Building Brains: Competency and Resiliency

Prerequisites: READ 30320 AND ECED 23211 AND INCL 02210; Concurrent Enrollment Allowed. Corequisite: ECED 23220

This course will build upon General Education coursework in Child Development, Human Exceptionality, and
Educational Psychology. Teacher candidates will apply knowledge from these foundational courses, as well as prior courses
on diversity, to understand how young children, birth through age eight, including children with special needs, develop and
learn. This course will highlight a risk and resiliency perspective with a focus on protective factors assessed through
intentional observations and screenings. Teacher candidates will apply theories of child development through formal and
informal observations and in-depth child studies in inclusive classrooms. Emphasis will be made on fostering social and
emotional development and developing resiliency. Teacher candidates will thoughtfully plan developmentally appropriate
learning experiences to foster growth and connect with learning standards. Clinical classroom visits are required.

END

ECED 23322:

Planning, Integrating, And Adapting Curriculum: Math And Science

Corequisites: ECED 23321; Prerequisites: READ 30320 AND ECED 23311 AND MATH 01201 AND MATH 01301 with Minimum Grade of C-

This course is designed to enable teacher candidates to understand and plan curriculums for teaching math and science.
This course will start from the perspective of teacher candidates' experiences of learning science and mathematics. They will
reflect on their own prior experiences with math and science and discover the impact of those experiences on their feelings
of efficacy. Teacher candidates will experience teaching strategies and processes that we expect them to master and use in
teaching math and science for young children in inclusive settings. Within an integrated framework, teacher candidates will
develop the conceptual knowledge base for developing a coherent science and mathematics program with developmentally
appropriate learning experiences. Clinical experiences are required.

END

ECED 23430:

Observation, Assessment, And Evaluation Of Diverse Learners

Corequisites: ECED 23431 AND ECED 23432; Prerequisites: ECED 23321 AND ECED 23322

This course provides teacher candidates with a dynamic hands-on exploration of the measurement and evaluation of
children who are in the developmental period known as early childhood. Teacher candidates will learn about standardized
measurement and other types of assessments that are appropriate for young children, including children with special needs.
The tools of authentic assessment including checklists, rating scales, or observations will be used within the candidates’ field
experience in both regular and special education settings. Research into the rationale of assessment of young children will
also be explored. Clinical experiences are required.

END

ECED 23431:

Planning, Integrating And Adapting Curriculum Across Content Areas

Corequisite: ECED 23430 Prerequisites: ECED 23321 and ECED 23322

This curriculum course considers the areas of Social Studies, Music, Movement, Arts, Drama, and Health/Physical
Education as disciplines with a major focus on the integration of curriculum in a rich learning environment. Teacher
candidates will also design learning communities that enhance all aspects of learning, by creating environments that reflect
the learning standards. Further, teacher candidates will learn of facilitating interdisciplinary units and projects within an
early childhood classroom in inclusive settings. Clinical experiences are required.

END

ECED 23510:

Curriculum Development In Early Childhood Programs

This course is focused on the content and characteristics of developmentally appropriate curriculum to support growth,
development, and learning of young children. Factors that influence early childhood curriculum development, the important
role of family and culture, the integration of play, literacy, and assessment are studied. Students learn to apply the
recommended standards for developmentally appropriate practices and curriculum. This course also includes a field
experience with visitations to early childhood classes/programs.

END

ECED 23511:

Understanding Child Development And Behavior In The Classroom

This course has two main components: Understanding child development and supporting young children’s social
emotional development in inclusive early childhood settings. Teacher candidates will utilize research in child development
including theories and perspectives from neuroscience and psychology to achieve a holistic understanding of development in
the first five years in order to guide young children’s social emotional development. Teacher candidates will work with
children in diverse settings and actively support young children with emerging social-emotional competencies. Completing
field based assignments is required.

END

ECED 23512:

Exploring the World: Literacy, Social Studies, and Creative Experiences in Early
Childhood

Prerequisites: ECED 23.511

This course provides candidates with knowledge, skills, and dispositions necessary to create authentic learning experiences
for young children through the integration of literacy, social studies, and creative experiences. Candidates will explore
various curriculum models and heavily use project approach and other play based and developmentally appropriate methods
to teach these subject areas in inclusive early childhood settings. Course content will emphasize diversity, family and
community as the foundation of curriculum with young children. Candidates will be required to develop and teach lessons in
the preschool classrooms and to develop a theme based unit plan built on the students data collected from the preschool
classroom.

END

ECED 23513:

Assessment In Early Childhood Education

Prerequisites: ECED 23512, ECED 23514 andCorequisite: ECED 23515

This course focuses on analyzing assessment methods in early childhood education. Candidates will examine different
methods and tools of assessment, explore the concept of assessment driven instruction, and learn to develop differentiated
instructional strategies based on student assessment data. They will also learn to share the data with families and other
professionals in the field. In addition to assessing students, candidates will explore early childhhood program assessment
tools such as teh Early Childhood Environmental Rating Scale-Revised (ECERS-R), the Classroom Assessment Scoring
System (CLASS), and the Assessment of Practice in Early Elementary Classrooms (APEEC), in order to ensure
comprehensive quality of the education. Conducting a case on one child in preschool level will be required for this course.

END

ECED 23514:

Family, Community, And Professional Ethics

Prerequisites: ECED 23511Corequisite: ECED 23512

This course focuses on parent-child relationships and partnerships between parents and their schools and communities.
The course examines the role of the parent and the development of young children (P-3). Issues related to P-3 children will
be studied along with topics such as family dynamics, curriculum, parental roles, and cultural diversity. Professional ethics
will be integrated throughout this course in relation to working with young children and their families both in individual and
group settings. Techniques for involving parents and families in school environments will be examined through discussion
and lecture. Developing a plan for collaborating with diverse families will be required for this course.

END

ECED 23515:

Young Scientists: Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math experiences in Early
Childhood (3)

Prerequisites: ECED 23512, ECED 23514Corequisites: ECED 23513

This course provides candidates with knowledge, skills, and dispositions necessary to create authentic learning experiences
for young children through the integration of science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM). Candidates will modify
the learning environment and materials, utilize project approach and use other play based and developmentally appropriate
methods in teaching STEM subject areas in inclusive early childhood settings. Course content will emphasize intellectual
and cognitive growth of young children and the ways to engage children in higher level thinking skills such as inquiry,
collaboration, critical thinking, and creativity. Candidates will teach children to complete field-based assignments.

END

ECED 23521:

Continuous Quality Improvement in Early Childhood: Research & Policy

This course will provide an overview of early childhood quality improvement initiatives and efforts for continuous quality
improvement (CQI). Students will examine the current landscape of research, policy and practice as it relates to quality
improvement efforts (including the role of technical assistance) and CQI, as well as frameworks and theories of change.
Students will also engage in a critical analysis of the definition of quality using theoretical frameworks as reference.

END

ECED 23522:

Critical Perspectives on Coaching & Mentoring in Diverse Early Childhood
Settings

This course focuses on the practices coaches and mentors utilize in early childhood settings. The course will provide a
thorough overview of different frameworks and theories of adult learning along with additional fundamental critical
perspectives examining the ways in which people learn and know. Students will investigate models for reflective practices
and apply them to their own work and experiences in the field through the lens of mentor/coach and mentee/coachee.

END

ECED 23523:

Access & Equity: Culturally Responsive Practices in Technical Assistance

Prerequisites: ECED 23521 and ECED 23522

This course will build on the literature on culturally responsive competencies and practices to provide a framework for the
early childhood technical assistance process. Students will examine critical issues such as gender, language, age, context,
sexuality, class, and culture and investigate the ways that leaders can be culturally responsive to the programs in the cultural
and community contexts they are situated as they provide technical assistance.

END

ECED 23524:

Implementation Science and Quality Improvement Initiatives

Prerequisites: ECED 23521 and ECED 23522

This course will focus on building an understanding of implementation science as a framework for helping translate
research to practice in early childhood education. Students will integrate implementation science components to help
implement evidence-based practices in quality improvement initiatives as a self-study. Students will draw on their past and
current field experience to develop a case study that involves a quality improvement plan for a program.

END

ECED 23526:

Developing Expertise as an Agent of Change within Early Childhood Systems

Prerequisites: ECED 23523 and ECED 23524

This course will examine the early childhood professional’s role as an agent of change by analyzing literature on equity,
access, policy, systems, community building, family engagement and advocacy as it relates to early childhood education.
Students will integrate multidisciplinary literature to build their knowledge, skills, and dispositions as leaders. Students will
apply their knowledge by engaging in an advocacy project that will serve educational and academic communities of early
childhood care and education in multiple ways.

END

ECED 23531:

Equity and Social Justice in Early Childhood STEM Education

In this course, students will develop a critical understanding of the historical, cultural, economic, and other institutional
forces that influence how STEM is taught in classrooms and out of classroom contexts. Topics explored include theoretical
perspectives on the teaching of STEM, access to STEM resources, approaches to narrowing demographic gaps in STEM
outcomes, contemporary models of STEM curriculum, and the integration of STEM Education through play-based and
project-based learning.

END

ECED 23532:

Experimenting with Art and Matter in Early Childhood

Prerquisite: ECED 23531

This course aims to deepen students’ understanding of social constructivist philosophies of teaching with a focus on the
Reggio Emilia Approach. The approach will emphasizes children’s capabilities, active construction of knowledge, and
multiple ways of experiencing the world. Students will learn how to teach experimental science through emergent projects
based on children’s curiosity and interests. Using the interconnected roles of the three teachers in the Reggio Emilia
Approach -teacher, parent, and environment-, students will learn how to build momentum and sustain deep engagement in
science-focused projects.

END

ECED 23533:

Math, Engineering and Technology in Early Childhood

Prerequisites: ECED 23531

This course will enable students to utilize math, engineering and technology in creative ways with young children and
develop a tinkering mindset that is playful, failure-positive, and emphasizes collective learning. Students will implement
frameworks that position children as creators, inventors, problem-solvers, designers, and innovators. Finally, students will
learn how to develop makerspaces in schools, use digital tools such as coding with young children, and design engineering
challenges based on real-world problems.

END

ECED 23534:

Environment and Nature in the Early Years

Prerequisites: ECED 23531

This course critically examines children’s relations with nature/environment. Students will learn current and emerging
theories and practices that relate to child-nature discourses. Students will examine critical and creative interventions that
specifically bring STEM disciplines into conversation with nature and culture in early childhood settings and apply their
learning in clinical settings.

END

ECED 23535:

Inquiry for Early Childhood Educators

Prerequisites: ECED 23531

In this course, students will examine key literature on participatory research methodologies, including practitioner inquiry,
a form of systematic and intentional inquiry carried out by teachers, principals, and other practitioners. Students will hone
research questions, design action research projects within schools, apply methods of data collection and analysis, and create
and share new knowledge about practice.

END

ECSE 10500:

Characteristics of Young Children with Disabilities (birth-five) and their Families

This course provides foundation content for key stakeholders to better understand the field of Early Childhood Special
Education (birth-five). Guiding theoretical frameworks, historical considerations, and disability-specific characteristics will
be presented in a strength-based, family-centered context. Students will have multiple opportunities to reflect on and
present new learning.

END

ECSE 10501:

Methods for Assessing and Teaching Infants and Toddlers with Disabilities

Prerequisites: ECSE 10500

This course provides the knowledge and skills necessary to be effective professionals in providing early intervention
services for families, infants, and toddlers with disabilities, and those at-risk for development delays. Emphasis is placed on
parent-professional collaboration and interagency/interdisciplinary planning, assessment, and design of family-focused,
culturally sensitive Individualized Family Service Plans (IFSP). The course includes an overview of a variety of curriculum
models, assessments, and instructional strategies for intervention practice (includes field experience).

END

ECSE 10502:

Methods for Assessing and Teaching Preschool Children (3-5) with Disabilities

Prerequisites: ECSE 10500

This course provides foundation content for educators to better understand the field of Early Childhood Special Education
(3-five). Age appropriate assessments, DEC best practice guidelines and NJ content standards will be presented in a
strength-based, naturalized environment and family-centered context. Students will have multiple opportunities to reflect
on and present new learning.

END

ECSE 10503:

Supporting Diverse Families, Community Partnerships, and Transitions

Prerequisites: ECSE 10500

This course provides foundation content for educators to better understand the field of Early Childhood Special
Education. The content of this course will focus on supporting young children with special needs and collaborating with
their families. Course material will include early childhood transitions and the effective collaboration with community and
educational stakeholders. Students will have multiple opportunities to reflect on and present new learning.

END

ECSE 10504:

Self-Study Project Inquiry in Early Childhood Special Education

Prerequisites: ECSE 10500

This course provides a culminating capstone experience for students enrolled in the Early Childhood Special Education
Certificate of Graduate Study (ECSE COGS). Students will select a timely area of inquiry in ECSE that directly or indirectly
impacts interdisciplinary professionals, families, and/or children with suspected or diagnosed disabilities across diverse
birth-five settings. Students will complete a literature review, service project, and presentation to relevant stakeholders.

END

EDST 24502:

Initiation Of Internship Project

see EDST24.608

END

EDST 24565:

Analysis And Application Of Research

Students will develop skills necessary to critically analyze and interpret educational research. Interpretation of statistics,
analysis of research design, and the use of educational data bases will be components of the course. Emphasis will be on the
application of educational research to actual classroom problems through a case study method as well as student-designed
projects.

END

EDST 24602:

Development Of Internship Project

This course has no description but see EDST-24608.

END

EDST 24608:

Internship Project Report

Students will design and complete an individual internship project applying scientific inquiry and research methodology to
an identified problem of interest in an area related to instructional practice, curriculum development and/or learning. These
courses, Initiation of Internship Project (1 S.H.), Development of Internship Project (1 S.H.) and the Internship Project
Report are completed during Phases II, III and IV of the Master of Science in Teaching Program.

END

EDUC 01500:

Trends And Practices In Classroom Teaching

Corequisites: ELEM 02511

This course focuses on emerging trends in elementary and subject matter classroom practices. Topics include standards
and accountability, constructivist and experiential teaching, inclusion and differentiation, culturally responsive teaching,
and collaboration with families and communities. Special emphasis is placed on the background of each trend, related issues,
and implications for practice.

END

EDUC 01601:

Clinical Internship I

END

EDUC 01603:

Clinical Seminar I

Students will complete a field experience focusing on sequenced observations and supervised beginning teaching
experiences in a variety of school settings. Specific competencies shall be developed in: 1) teaching and learning, 2)
curriculum, 3) pupil guidance, and 4) classroom organization and management. Concurrent seminar study will focus on
knowledge of the special needs of students, applications of educational technology and student assessment and evaluation.

END

EDUC 01605:

Clinical Internship II

END

EDUC 01607:

Clinical Seminar II

Students will complete a supervised semester-long teaching internship in an assigned classroom and school setting. They
will research and apply general and specialized knowledge to the processes involved in full-time classroom teaching and
other teacher responsibilities. Seminar study will emphasize effective teaching practices that extends their previous learning
and current intern teaching.

END

EDUC 01608:

Internship Project Report

Students will design and complete an individual internship project applying scientific inquiry and research methodology to
an identified problem of interest in an area related to instructional practice, curriculum development and/or learning. These
courses, Initiation of Internship Project (1 S.H.), Development of Internship Project (1 S.H.) and the Internship Project
Report are completed during Phases II, III and IV of the Master of Science in Teaching Program.

END

EDUC 01610:

TCHNG FOR EQUIT/ACHIEV DVRS CL

This course focuses on issues and concepts in critical multicultural education and their implications for teaching and
learning in diverse school settings. Students will critically examine influences on students' schooling experiences and the
historic and current challenges of non-dominant students in the U.S., such as racism, discrimination, school organization,
and the social and political contexts of school and society. The course will also focus on methods to build a multicultural
classroom that supports equity and achievement for all students.

END

EDUC 01624:

Educational Change

Prerequisites: ELEM 02550 with a minimum grade of B

To assume leadership roles and to become change agents for their respective schools, teachers will analyze the influences,
trends, social and political forces that generate and impact educational change at varying levels, i.e., at the classroom, school,
community, state, and national levels. They will develop knowledge of the stages of systemic education change and strategies
to achieve and sustain momentum for change. Various field work components will be integrated throughout this course.

END

EDUC 01700:

Leadership Through Professional Learning Communities

This course is designed to provide Ed.D. students with the opportunity to plan and put into practice their knowledge,
skills, and dispositions for providing leadership through Professional Learning Communities. This course will begin by
examining the critical stages of group development in establishing Professional Learning Communities, through the lens of
detailed school-based examples. Students will follow this examination by engaging in their own identification of an
educational issue, and complete a subsequent PLC plan, implement the plan, document and analyze experience and report.

END

EDUC 02602:

MST Professional Seminar

Prerequisites: EDUC 01610 and SELN 42954 and EDUC 01601 and either ELEM 02513 or SMED 60501. Corequisites: EDST 24504
and EDUC 01605

This course provides support to MST candidates as they undergo their student teaching experience (Clinical Internship
II). Candidates are required to reflect regularly on their teaching and school experiences and use these reflections as a basis
for discussion in the course. Throughout the semester, they will make connections between the course readings and
discussions and their professional practice. Specific course topics will include classroom management, assessment, inclusion,
culturally responsive teaching, motivating students, working with families and communities, the job search, and professional
development.

END

ELEM 02210:

Seminar: Principles and Pedagogies in the Inclusive Classroom

Corequisites: INCL 02210

This seminar course serves as the vehicle for domain-specific application of the principles and pedagogies that promote the
use of positive management techniques supportive of all learners in an inclusive setting. Through case study scenarios,
videos, virtual and live experiences in Early Childhood, Elementary, Art, Music, and Physical Education instructional
settings, students will have multiple, varied opportunities to reflect on and apply new learning to enhance their
understanding of proactive behavior strategies and supports.

END

ELEM 02338:

Practicum In Mathematics And Literacy

Corequisites: ELEM 02336 and READ 30351 Prerequisites: ELEM 02319 and SPED 08316

This field experience course provides an opportunity for candidates in the Elementary Education Specialization to practice
their developing instructional skills once a week in a K-5 classroom setting. Candidates will work with partners in assigned
classrooms to assist with literacy and mathematics instruction and to take the lead in developing and teaching lessons in
literacy and mathematics.

END

ELEM 02512:

Teaching Math, Science, And Health In Elementary Classrooms

Prerequisites: ELEM 02511 and EDUC 01500Corequisites: READ 30555

This course focuses on understanding and developing inquiry-based, interdisciplinary instruction based on national and
state standards in mathematics, science, and health at the elementary school level. Students will critically examine the
principles of inquiry-based instruction and develop interdisciplinary lesson plans along with performance-based assessments.
As a culminating project, students will develop a hands-on learning kit for the elementary classroom.

END

ELEM 02513:

Teaching Language Arts, Social Studies And The Arts In Elementary Classrooms

Prerequisites: READ 30515 and ELEM 02512Corequisites: EDUC 01601 and EDUC 01610and SELN 42954

This course examines the use of established elementary education content standards and teaching methods in social
studies, the arts, and language arts and how interdisciplinary, thematic units of inquiry facilitate meeting those standards.
Students apply current research on how children learn and on effective teaching methods in social studies, the arts, and
language arts. Students also apply instructional knowledge and skills they are developing related to inquiry-based
interdisciplinary instruction, assessment, and differentiating that instruction for elementary students in the corequisite
field internship.

END

ELEM 02539:

Contemporary Curriculum Processes/Elementary Language Arts

This course examines current theory and practice in the teaching of all of the language skills of the elementary school.
Criteria are developed for evaluating teaching practices in terms of today's demand for improved and expanded
communications skills. This course may not be offered annually.

END

ELEM 02540:

Contemporary Curriculum Processes/Elementary Mathematics

The primary purpose of this course is to examine and evaluate practices of teaching and criteria of evaluating mathematics
in the elementary grades. Criteria will be obtained by studying research findings and examining the recommendations of
authorities in the field. Courses of study will be evaluated using established criteria. This course may not be offered annually.

END

ELEM 02552:

Research On Children's Mathematical Learning

This course introduces the graduate student to theories of how elementary and middle-school students learn mathematics
and to current research on children's thinking and learning of mathematics. It surveys research findings on the child's
understanding of mathematical concepts such as number, operations, fractions and proportions, measurement, and space.
The focus of the course is how children learn mathematics, and it will enable the graduate student to see mathematics from
the standpoint of the elementary and middle school child. This course will aid the teacher in discerning a child's
understanding of mathematics as a basis for determining the type of mathematics instruction for which he/she is ready.

END

ELEM 02556:

Principles Of Identification And Treatment Of Mathematics Deficiencies

This course introduces the student to the principles of identifying, prescribing, planning and teaching for mathematics
deficiencies in elementary school children. Students have the opportunity to design a diagnostic instrument and plan an
individualized instructional program based upon findings. This course may not be offered annually.

END

ELEM 02601:

Seminar In Elementary Teaching

Each student is expected to conceive, conduct and report an investigation that will display sound knowledge of educational
theory, appropriate research procedures and skill in communication.(ELEM02.600 offered in fall only; ELEM02.601
offered in spring only.)

END

FNDS 21230:

Characteristics of Knowledge Acquisition

This course will focus on how human beings think, process information and acquire skills. Discussion of learning
philosophies and applications in a variety of settings will be addressed. Methods of inquiry, reflection, motivation, creativity
and critical thinking will be explored.

END

FNDS 21530:

Foundations Of Multi-Cultural Education

This course is designed to focus on the key relationships between formal education as a social and cultural institution in
American society and multicultural education as a response to contemporary societal needs. The course examines the areas
of curriculum, pedagogy and evaluation in multicultural education as they affect and are affected by the education
professional. The course requires empirical investigation and subsequent analysis through selected topics in research in
Intercultural Education.

END

INCL 02310:

STREAM 1: Social Studies, ELA, and the Arts

Prerequisites: INCL 02250 and INCL 02330Corequisites: INCL 02315 and INCL 02320 and INCL 02325and READ 30351

This course explores the use of established elementary education content standards and pedagogical methods in social
studies, English/language arts, and the fine arts, and how interdisciplinary, thematic units of inquiry facilitate meeting those
standards. Students apply current research on how children learn and on effective teaching methods in social studies,
English/language arts, and the fine arts. Students also apply instructional knowledge and skills they are developing related to
inquiry-based, interdisciplinary instruction, assessment, and differentiation in the corequisite STREAM I Clinical
Experience course.

END

INCL 02320:

STREAM II: STEM & Health in the Inclusive Classroom

Prerequisites: INCL 02250 and INCL 02330Corequisites: INCL 02310 and INCL 02325 and INCL 02315and INCL 02335 and READ 30351

This course focuses on understanding and developing inquiry-based, interdisciplinary instruction based on national and
state standards in science, technology, engineering, mathematics, and health education at the elementary school level.
Students will critically examine the principles of inquiry-based instruction and design-based instruction, develop
interdisciplinary lesson plans, and develop performance-based assessments. Utilizing current research findings about how
students develop STEM & Health concepts and processes, candidates will develop an understanding of teaching and
learning related to STEM & Health disciplines at the elementary level. Teacher candidates will develop repertoire of
instructional strategies and will develop and analyze effective science, technology, engineering, and mathematics and health
instruction.

END

INCL 02330:

Differentiating Instruction in the Inclusive Classroom

Prerequisites: SPED 08130 and INCL 02210 and ELEM 02210Corequisite: INCL 02250

This course focuses on how the diverse needs of individuals with educational disabilities/differences can be met within the
general education classroom environment. Emphasis will be on communication and collaboration with parents and
education professionals, understanding of linguistic and cultural differences, and utilizing instructional strategies in
response to the results of differentiated assessments to meet individual needs.

END

INCL 02440:

Diversity Seminar

Prerequisites: ELEM 02448 (may be taken concurrently) or INCL 02445 (may be taken concurrently)

This Diversity Seminar is a capstone course in the Elementary Education program and will help teacher candidates
enrolled in clinical practice reflect upon and better understand their practitioner experiences through a series of discussions,
readings, and course assignments. In this course, candidates develop a philosophy of teaching; gather and present evidence
of their comprehensive knowledge, skills, and dispositions expected in this profession; and demonstrate knowledge of
current critical and contemporary issues facing educators and other stakeholders in education.

END

INCL 02550:

International Experiences in Education

This course encourages and facilitates global experiences of an educational and cultural nature for students at all stages in
the progression of their university coursework. It will enhance students’ historical, cultural, and social perspectives within
the context of policy, human rights, health, social and educational representations, and technology. This course will be
beneficial for all students in developing their professional dispositions. Students participate in pre-travel orientation
meetings and a post-travel meeting as determined by the destination and the course instructor. In order to receive credit for
the course, students must attend 90% of the pre-travel meetings and the post-travel meeting and submit a final project
which includes reflective summary of their international experience.

END

LDTC 18500:

INDEPENDENT STUDY

Prerequisites: None

There is no description for this course

END

LDTC 18503:

Foundations Of Learning Disabilities

A general introduction to learning disabilities, with emphasis upon remediation of basic skills and pedagogical rationale.
Students will become familiar with the various types of disorders encountered in pupils with learning disabilities and with
appropriate instructional techniques and materials.

END

LDTC 18504:

Assessment Of Learning Disabilities

In this two semester sequence, emphasis will be on evaluation and remediation of learning disorders in school age children.
A case study is required. Enrollment limited to students matriculated in the Learning Disabilities program. (LDTC18.504 is
offered in the fall semester and LDTC18.505 is offered in the spring semester.)

END

LDTC 18505:

Correction Of Learning Disabilities

In this two semester sequence, emphasis will be on evaluation and remediation of learning disorders in school age children.
A case study is required. Enrollment limited to students matriculated in Learning Disabilities program. (LDTC18.504 is a
prerequisite.LDTC18.505 is offered in the spring semester.)

END

LDTC 18510:

Applied Theories Of Learning

Educators will develop and articulate their own theories of learning after examining carefully and critically the prevalently
existing and competing theories of learning. The study of motivation and its effect on learning including the use of rewards
and incentives will be covered as well.

END

LDTC 18516:

Applied Tests And Measurements

Emphasis is placed upon data-gathering, the evaluation of data and the use of data in educational measurement.
Standardized tests, both group and individual, will be studied. Generally, enrollment is limited to those who have been
formally admitted to the student personnel services, learning disabilities and school psychology programs.

END

LDTC 18520:

Neurological Bases Of Educational Disorders

The student will study the nature of physiological readiness for learning with regard to the various disabilities. The varieties
of physical, mental, and learning disabilities will be related to the neurophysiological basis for learning.

END

LDTC 18525:

Advanced Assessment Techniques

This course is designed for the advanced graduate student in learning disabilities. It provides for the development of
competence in a variety of assessment instruments useful in differential diagnosis of complex learning problems. (LDTC
18504 and LDTC 18505 are prerequisites)

END

LDTC 18540:

Motor Development In Young Children With Disabilities

The course investigates motor development resulting in disabling conditions in young children. Major theorists and
research are an integral part of the course work. Assessment options and research-based interventions are explored. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

LDTC 18545:

Language Development In Young Children With Disabilities

The course investigates language acquisition and the physiological, environmental and psychological factors which may
influence that development in the young children. This course may not be offered annually.

END

LDTC 18550:

Foundations In Early Childhood Special Education

The course surveys the bases of disabilities in young children. Diagnostic techniques, materials and methods are explored.
Classic studies and current research will be studied.

END

LDTC 18600:

Seminar And Research In Learning Disabilities

This course considers current issues, trends, problems, and research of significance to learning disabilities. Students
complete a thesis/project which evidences capacity for research and independent thought. Registration by permission of the
program advisor only. The comprehensive examination is taken during LDTC18.601.

END

LDTC 18601:

Seminar And Research In Learning Disabilities

This course considers current issues, trends, problems, and research of significance to learning disabilities. Students
complete a project which evidences capacity for research and independent thought. Registration by permission of the
program advisor only. The comprehensive examination is taken during LDTC18.601.

END

LDTC 18650:

Clinical & Field Experiences In Learning Disabilities

Students engage directly in supervised case work with children demonstrating learning disorders. Assessment and
appropriate, research-based remediation of learning problems, consultation skills and in-service program design are required
in a 120-clock hour clinical and field setting. A seminar is also a component of this course. Only matriculated students may
register for this course.

END

METL 01624:

Educational Change

To assume leadership roles and to become change agents for their respective schools, teachers will analyze the influences,
trends, social and political forces that generate and impact educational change at varying levels, i.e., at the classroom, school,
community, state, and national levels. They will develop knowledge of the stages of systemic education change and strategies
to achieve and sustain momentum for change. Various field work components will be integrated throughout this course.

END

METL 50511:

Teacher Leadership and Learning Communities

This course focuses on identifying and unpacking the standards that guide teacher leadership in practice. One of the major
elements of teacher leadership is the professional learning community. This course will prepare teacher leaders for planning,
implementing, leading, and evaluating the effectiveness of professional learning communities.

END

METL 50512:

Curriculum Development for Teacher Leaders and Other School Professionals

This course provides background in goals, objectives, assumptions, values, issues, and theory related to contemporary
curriculum. Topics include learning and curriculum, the nature and structure of knowledge and curriculum design, and
evaluation criteria specifically for teacher leaders, administrators, and other school professionals (e.g., school psychologists,
school counselors, consultants) for curriculum planning. This is a basic course, which is a prerequisite for further study in
curriculum.

END

METL 50513:

Teacher Leadership in Practice

Prerequisites: METL 50511

In this course, students will explore the foundations of teacher leadership as well as develop understandings about how
research is conducted in the field and the elements they will put into place to make that happen in the second course in this
two part course series (METL 50514). Students will read seminal research pieces in an effort to develop their abilities for
conducting research in the field of teacher leadership.

END

METL 50514:

Agency in Teacher Leadership

Prerequisites: METL 50513

In this course, students will explore agency, their personal capacity to act in response to motivations within their own
pedagogical environment. Further, through implementation of a problem of practice designed in the first course of this two
part series (METL 50513), they will enact their power for change as they build their capacities to shape critically their
responses to educational practices and processes. The ultimate goal of this course is for students to become teacher leaders
who transform their own practices to ensure the best educational outcomes for their students.

END

METL 50515:

Teacher Leadership Capstone

Prerequisites: METL 50514

This course is required only for students interested in applying for the New Jersey Department of Education Teacher
Leadership Endorsement. This capstone course assists teacher leaders in gathering evidence and documenting their
competence in meeting the Teacher Leaders Model Standards. The culminating activity is an electronic portfolio and
presentation.

END

METL 50516:

Analysis of Classroom Teacher Behavior

Prerequisites: METL 50511

Through a review of the literature and self-analysis, students will examine relationships between teacher personality
characteristics, classroom processes, and pupil achievement. All students will have opportunities to identify variables which
research reveals as significantly correlated with pupil growth. Ample opportunity will be provided for students to develop
expertise in the use of a low-inference, relatively objective, and highly reliable system of analyzing classroom interaction. This course may not be offered annually.

END

METL 50550:

Self-Study in Teacher Leadership

Prerequisites: METL 50512 & METL 50514 & METL 50516 & LDTC 18510

During the final semester of their studies in the Master of Education in Teacher Leadership degree, students will work
closely with a faculty member to conduct a scholarly self-study that examines how their emerging teacher leadership skills
reflects the standards that guide the program and current research in teacher leadership. This self-study will result in the
production of a Synthesis Portfolio, a visual or graphic organizer, and a slide-show guided presentation of the graduate
candidates’ work and accomplishments during the time of their program studies in teacher leadership.

END

SELN 10576:

Effective Inclusive Instruction

This course is designed to begin developing the knowledge, skills, and dispositions necessary for general education teachers
to understand and educate students in inclusive classrooms. Emphasis will be on: (a) understanding the legal foundations for
inclusive instruction, (b) recognizing students' diverse strengths and needs, (c) designing, implementing, and assessing
effectively differentiated lessons that feature research-based strategies, and (d) organizing and managing a flexible,
student-centered classroom.

END

SELN 10577:

Collaborative Instruction In Inclusive Classrooms

Prerequisites: SPED 08555

This course will focus on instructional strategies in inclusive classrooms for students with and without disabilities.
Collaborative and consultative skills for working with parents, regular education teachers, special education teachers,
support personnel, and school administrators will be discussed and modeled, as well as role play for team teaching in such
environments.

END

SELN 10578:

Special Education Policy, Advocacy, and Teacher Leadership

This course focuses on the federal and state policies and regulations guiding special education programming in P-12 public
schools. Particular attention is given to the role of teacher leaders in advocating for appropriate service and placements for
students with disabilities.

END

SELN 10580:

Teaching Students With Moderate And Severe Disabilities

Through this course students acquire knowledge of the curriculum, assessment procedures, and intervention strategies
required to effectively teach individuals with moderate and severe disabilities. Among the areas of emphasis are functional
academics, personal care, recreation/leisure, vocational and community living skills. Research-based best practice in
instruction for students with moderate and severe disabilities is stressed.

END

SELN 10581:

Implementing Positive Behavior Supports

This course provides the student with a comprehensive study of the goals of misbehavior in classrooms and in other
settings. Specific theoretical techniques and methodology in channeling deviant behavior through the use of behavior
modification and other management techniques will be explored. Curricula content, self-development, attitudes, and
research finding will enable each student to acquire effective skills in working with learning resistant and deviant behaving
children and adults.

END

SELN 10582:

Communication Skills For Students With Disabilities

This course provides an intensive study of the language needs of students with moderate and severe disabilities and
includes individual assessment for the identification of initial communication and the development of acceptable language
procedures. Finger spelling, basic American Sign Language, and using technology to develop alternative communication
strategies will be covered.

END

SELN 10585:

Educational Assessment In Special Education

Trends, practices, problems and issues in educational assessment will be examined. The course is designed to enable the
special education teacher to administer criterion-referenced, informal, or standardized tests and to plan individualized
educational programs for students with special needs. Curriculum-based assessment is emphasized.

END

SELN 10586:

Emotional And Behavioral Support Strategies

This graduate course will discuss positive strategies, related laws and regulations, and services to support students with
behavioral and emotional problems. Social and emotional factors that affect behavior and learning will be explored.
Emphasis will be placed on appropriate academic and social skills instruction, and pro-social interventions to meet the needs
of students with difficulties in social and emotional adjustments.

END

SELN 10590:

Introduction To Autism Spectrum Disorders

This course is designed to provide graduate level instruction in the salient issues involved in the education of students with
autism spectrum disorders (including autism, Rett syndrome and other pervasive developmental disorders). It provides an
overview to candidates about the characteristics, language development, social relationship development, and instructional
interventions for children with autism spectrum disorders.

END

SELN 10591:

Instructional Methods For Students With Autism Spectrum Disorders

Prerequisites: SELN 10590

This course is designed to provide graduate level instruction in the assessment and instruction of students with autism
spectrum disorders. Students will learn about evidence-based practices for enhancing the academic, social, behavioral, and
communication skills of students with autism spectrum disorders. They will apply their learning in both in-class case study
activities and through classroom application. In addition to specialized practices, students will learn how to modify
instruction in general education classes to meet the needs of students with autism spectrum disorders.

END

SELN 10592:

Clinical Seminar In Special Education

This seminar course is designed to be taken concurrently with the clinical field practice. Students meet throughout the
semester to discuss teaching experiences, problem solving strategies, and their own reflections on working with children and
youth with disabilities. A report on student progress monitoring are also completed. A written comprehensive examination
will be completed during the course.

END

SELN 10593:

Clinical Internship In Special Education

This course will provide students an opportunity to apply research-based best practice in the field to teach children and
youth with mild, moderate, or severe disabilities. Participants will be observed by both college supervisors and their mentor
teachers, and will reflect on their instruction for improvement.

END

SELN 10600:

Research Seminar In Special Education

Students are expected to conduct an original research project. Guidance and assistance will be provided to help identify a
problem, select appropriate research procedures, conduct a study, and write a comprehensive review of the results.

END

SELN 10601:

RSRCH SEM IN SPCL ED

END

SELN 10610:

Inquiry in Special Education Settings

Prerequisites: Matriculation in MA in Special Education

Students will learn about the research methods that form the basis for evidence-based practices in special education. They
will study research methodologies and how they can be used to evaluate practice by reviewing recent research on the
effectiveness of special education practices. Students will develop a proposal to evaluate the effectiveness of a practice used
in a special education setting. (Taken at the end of the MA SPED program; take SELN 10610 and SELN 10611 in the same
semester with the same instructor.)

END

SELN 10611:

Practicum: Inquiry in Special Education Settings

Prerequisites: Matriculation in MA in Special Education

Students will evaluate the effectiveness of a practice used in a special education setting and share the results with their
school community. (Students take SELN 10610 and SELN 10611 in the same semester with the same instructor.)

END

SELN 60576:

Inclusive Instruction in STEM Classrooms

Prerequisites: B- or higher in: STEM 60501, READ 30520, STEM 60510Corequisite(s): STEM 60502 and STEM 60512

With a focus on STEM education for students with special needs, this course is designed to begin developing the
knowledge, skills, and dispositions necessary for STEM teachers to understand and education students in inclusive
classrooms. Emphasis will be on: (a) understanding the legal foundations for inclusive instruction, (b) recognizing students'
diverse strengths and needs, (c) designing, implementing, and assessing effectively differentiated lessons that feature
research-based strategies, and (d) organizing and managing a flexible, student-centered classroom.

END

SELN 60577:

Effective Inclusive Instruction in English, Social Studies, Theatre, and World
Language Classrooms

In this course candidates will learn how to identify the learning difficulties of students with exceptional learning needs and
assess, plan, and teach these students using evidence based practices that will enable candidates to succeed in subject matter
content classes.

END

SMED 33502:

Processes & Principles Of School Mathematics

In this course, designed for certified teachers of secondary school mathematics, students will expand their pedagogical
repertoires to include the mathematical processes of communicating,representing, making connections, problem solving,
and reasoning and proving. The principles of curriculum, teaching, technology, equity,learning, and assessment will provide
a framework for the study of the processes and students?current practice. These processes and principles will be studied
entirely within the context of school mathematics content.

END

SMED 60500:

Teaching Methods I: Subject Matter

Prerequisites: ELEM 02511 and EDUC 01500; Corequisites: READ 30515

This course is the first of two subject-specific methods courses required for secondary candidates in the Master's of
Science in Teaching program. MST Teacher candidates will learn to organize instructional materials into standards-based
units and daily lessons appropriate for K-12 learners. This course focuses on learning theory, standards-based lesson and unit
planning, pedagogy, classroom management, and learner diversity.

END

SMED 60501:

Teaching Methods II: Subject Matter

Prerequisites: SMED 60500 and READ 30515; Corequisites: EDUC 01601 and EDUC 01610 and SELN 42954

This course is the second of two subject-specific methods courses required for secondary candidates in the Master's of
Science in Teaching program. Candidates will continue to learn ways to organize instructional materials into
standards-based units and daily lessons approporiate for K-12 learners. In conjunction with a corequisite Internship I
experience, this course covers a range of topics necessary to building a learning community in secondary classrooms, such as
learning theory, standards-based lesson and unit planning, pedagogy, classroom management, and learner diversity.

END

SPED 02340:

Teaching Students with Autism Spectrum Disorder

Prerequisites: SPED 08130 and SPED 08360

This undergraduate course focuses on the instruction and assessment of students with autism spectrum disorders. Students
will learn about evidence-based practices for enhancing the academic, social, behavioral, and communication skills of P-16
learners with autism spectrum disorders. Students will apply this learning in both in-class study activities and across clinical
experiences. In addition to specialized practices, students will learn how to modify instruction in general education classes
to meet the needs of students with autism spectrum disorders.

END

SPED 08130:

Disability as Diversity

This general education course is designed to foster students' critical thinking about disability and ableism grounded in
disability studies, critical pedagogy and social justice education. Students will examine social and cultural foundations of
oppression, learn to disrupt ableism and to position themselves as agents of social change working to build inclusive
communities.

END

SPED 08307:

Assessment in Special and Inclusive Education

Prerequisites: SPED 08130

This course emphasizes linking assessment with educational instruction in inclusive and special education. Prospective
classroom teachers will learn how to routinely utilize formal and informal assessments to support all students in various
inclusive settings. Teacher candidates will also have the opportunity to develop and demonstrate competencies related to
assessment in conjunction with a required field experience component.

END

SPED 08308:

Assistive Technology And Transition Planning

Prerequisites: SPED 08130

This course focuses on exposing teacher candidates to a variety of accessible and assistive technologies. Students will gain
hands-on skills in selecting and designing technology-based instructional materials for students with a wide range of
instructional and communication needs. Teacher candidates will also explore transition planning across the educational
continuum. Teacher candidates will also have the opportunity to develop and demonstrate competencies related to assistive
technology and transition planning in conjunction with a required field experience component.

END

SPED 08316:

Differentiated Instruction In The Inclusive Classroom

Prerequisites: SPED 08130

This Junior Level (300) course will focus on how the diverse needs of individuals with educational disabilities/differences
can be met within the general education classroom environment. Emphasis will be on developing
communication/collaboration, instructional and assessment strategies that will assist the classroom teacher in diversifying
instruction to meet individual needs. A field component is required.

END

SPED 08325:

Pract Spec Ed I

END

SPED 08326:

Pract Spec Ed II

END

SPED 08350:

TOSD Clinical Experience I

Corequisite(s): SPED 08360 and SPED 08307

This course serves as the field placement for SPED 08308 and SPED 08415. Students must complete the field requirements
of those in a classroom that includes students with low incidence special needs.

END

SPED 08351:

TOSD Clinical Experience II

Corequisite(s): SPED 08308 and SPED 08415

This course serves as the field placement for SPED 08308 and SPED 08415. Students must complete the field requirements
of those courses in a classroom that includes students with low incidence special needs.

END

SPED 08360:

Positive Behavioral Support Systems

Prerequisites: SPED 08130

This course exposes teacher candidates to a variety of theoretical approaches in behavior support of students. Students will
develop an individual support plan and explore multi-tiered class-wide and school-wide behavior support systems to support
all students. Teacher candidates will also have the opportunity to develop and demonstrate competencies related to positive
behavior intervention supports in conjunction with a required field experience component.

END

SPED 08415:

Specialized Instruction For Students With Exceptional Learning Needs

Prerequisites: SPED 08130 and SPED 08316and SPED 08307

This senior-level course enhances the systematic progression of skills initiated during the earlier stages of the Teacher of
Students with Disabilities Endorsement Program. The course prepares candidates to teach students with exceptional
learning needs, covering instructional methods and strategies to teach self-help, motor, reading, math, language, study skills,
science, and social studies. The course also emphasizes supporting students with exceptional learning needs in inclusive
classrooms. There is a required field experience component with this course.

END

SPED 08445:

Clinical Seminar in Specialized Education

Prerequisites: SPED 08415

This course exposes teacher candidates to how to modify, adapt and supplement general education curricula for students
with and without disability labels. Students will develop lesson plans and create cross-curricular modifications in order to
create multiple access points for all students. Teacher candidates will also have the opportunity to develop and demonstrate
competencies related to specialized instruction in conjunction with a required field experience component.

END

SPED 08450:

Clinical Practice In Special Education

Prerequisites: SPED 08415 or SPED 08416

This is the culminating field experience for candidates seeking a Teacher of Disabilities Endorsement. Clinical Practice
provides candidates with full-time placement in a classroom setting that serves students with disability labels. Under
university supervision and working with a collaborating teacher or mentor, candidates assume full responsibility for
planning, teaching, and managing a classroom during this placement.

END

SPED 08515:

Curriculum, Instruction, And Transition In Special Education

This course will provide an overview of instructional strategies for teaching students with disabilities. It will focus on
research-based best practices of instruction to students with disabilities in the areas of academics, social interactions, and
transition from school to adulthood and employment. Training and education to prepare individuals with disabilities for
successful community living will also be emphasized. Field-based assignments are required.

END

SPED 08520:

Clinical Practice with Students with Disabilities

This course provides the student with the opportunity to engage in a variety of field-based experiences with students with
disabilities. Participants will be placed in self-contained, resource centers and inclusive settings to apply research-based best
practices. (Apply via TK20 ~6 months in advance by set deadlines; taken concurrently with SELN 10592.)

END

SPED 08540:

Technology For Students With Disabilities

This course is designed to instruct educators on the effective implementation of accessible, assistive, and instructional
technologies to support learners with disability labels. Students will explore concepts around assistive technology evaluation;
accessibility-based technology to support inclusive practices; and assistive technologies to support academic success,
communication, and independence. Students will also conduct an assistive technology evaluation and develop an
implementation plan for an assistive device or tool based on individualized student needs.

END

SPED 08555:

Education and Psychology of Students with Disabilities

This course provides an in-depth study on how to support students with multiple and complex disability labels in P-12
settings who benefit from specialized social and educational programming. Course content will help students understand
barriers to accessing inclusive education for students with visible and invisible disabilities, as well as the importance of
identifying learners’ strengths and support needs.

END

SPED 08595:

INDEP STUDY-SP ED

END

DA 01510:

Data Analytics Laboratory I

Prerequisites: Graduate standing or permission of the instructor.

This lab provides faculty guidance and supervision beyond the scope of existing courses. Students learn how to develop and
structure their deliverables, as well as how to use data analytics tools in the context of real-world or research projects.

END

DA 01511:

Data Analytics Laboratory II

Prerequisites: Graduate standing or permission of the instructor.

This second lab provides additional faculty guidance and supervision beyond the scope of existing courses. Students learn
how to develop and structure their deliverables, as well as how to use data analytics tools inthe context of real-world or
research projects.

END

DA 03520:

Healthcare Management

Prerequisites: Graduate standing or permission of the instructor.

This course provides a comprehensive overview of the healthcare management field. Students will be introduced to
organizational behavior theories as well as organizational behavior issues specific to the healthcare industry. Students will
gain an understanding of the major functions, roles, and responsibilities of those working in healthcare management,
including resource and technology management. Students will also gain an appreciation for the legal and ethical issues
inherent in healthcare management.

END

DI 68501:

Introduction to Diversity & Inclusion

This course will introduce students to the study of Diversity and Inclusion and the concepts of inclusion and exclusion
through critically examining ascribed statuses, the roots and intractability of the exclusion of groups cast as subordinated,
the concepts of privilege and disprivilege, and the different realities at the intersections of multiple minority group statuses.
The course will prepare students to become change agents, able to contribute to the deinstitutionalizing of the "isms" in
their educational, employment, and social network environments. This course will be offered annually, as a first semester
requirement for incoming cohorts.

END

DI 68520:

Topics in Diversity and Inclusion

This course introduces students to an in-depth topic relevant to Diversity and Inclusion. The course will offer
graduate-level work on a "special topic" that will vary from semester to semester. The content may come from a wide range
of disciplines but will provide specific topics in specific content or on career building skills including, but not limited to
topics related to diversity, equity, identity, cross-cultural communication, social psychology, or law.

END

DPEM 00101:

Introduction to Emergency Management and Homeland Security

This course presents comprehensive overview of the discipline of Emergency Management and Homeland Security.
Attention to mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery will be emphasized. An analysis of past disasters will be
presented along with their impacts on policy formation leading up to the current FEMA all-hazards approach. The role,
duties, and importance of the Emergency Management professional will be discussed throughout the semester. Moreover, a
discussion of ethical issues and career options will be presented.

END

DPEM 00310:

Critical Infrastructure in Emergency Management and Homeland Security

Prerequisites: DPEM 00101

This course introduces students to the methods and approaches to protecting critical infrastructure as a means of
effectively protecting people, physical entities and cyber systems and the establishment of an effective incident command
operation. Moreover, students will examine vulnerability rise reduction strategies, contingency planning, and strategic
partnership models as they are applied to the critical infrastructure sectors. Course topics include risk assessment and
management, contingency planning, training and exercises, the role of the crisis management team, crisis communications,
and public and private sector roles and relationships in emergency management.

END

DPEM 00400:

Disaster Planning, Mitigation and Recovery

The purpose of Disaster Planning, Mitigation and Recovery is to introduce the concepts and skills of hazard mitigation
and recovery planning, vulnerability risk analysis, and implementation of a community-wide program disaster preparedness
plan, and to relate them to hazard planning and mitigation processes of disaster planning. Students will design an exercise,
identify the logistics necessary for execution and management of the exercise, and develop an exercise evaluation plan. The
course instruction will follow and meet the guidelines established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency exercise
design and evaluation courses and the Department of Homeland Security Exercise and Evaluation Program.

END

DPEM 00410:

Public Leadership in Crisis Management & Communications

This course provides an overview of political and organizational leadership in crisis situations by addressing prevention of
potential crises, mitigation of those that do occur, and recovery and restoration in the wake of a crisis. Students learn why
effective crisis preparation and response are crucial, how to handle internal and external communications, and which
leadership qualities are essential for effectively managing a crisis.

END

DS 03650:

Thesis I in Data Science

In consultation with the instructor, students will identify and research a specific topic of interest in Data Analytics.
Students will define a thesis project and develop a formal specification of their intended project for completion in Thesis II
in Data Analytics under the supervision of Data Analytics faculty from either the Department of Mathematics or the
Department of Computer Science.

END

DS 03651:

Thesis II in Data Science

Prerequisites: DS 03650

Students will follow their formal project specification developed in Thesis I in Data Analytics to research a specific topic
area of Data Analytics and produce a written thesis under the supervision of Data Analytics faculty from either the
Department of Mathematics or the Department of Computer Science.

END

DS 03652:

Thesis III in Data Science

Prerequisites: DS 03651

This is a continuation course for Thesis II in Data Analytics. The students in this course would either expand upon
existing research projects from their earlier course or start newer projects which will be evaluated on an individual
case-by-case basis and be under the supervision of Data Analytics faculty from either the Department of Mathematics or the
Department of Computer Science. This course will serve as the capstone experience for the Masters in Data Analytics.

END

HGS 70507:

Introduction to Holocaust and Genocide Education

This course provides students with the fundamental content knowledge and skills they need to teach Holocaust and
Genocide education, broadly situated. Intended for teachers and those working in public history and engaging in anti-bias
education in other institutions, this course will focus on learning the history of the Holocaust and genocides, pedagogies and
interdisciplinary methodologies for teaching these difficult histories.

END

HGS 70527:

Colloquium in Holocaust and Genocide Studies

This course introduces students to an in-depth topic relevant to the Holocaust and Genocide. The course will offer
graduate-level work on a "special topic" that will vary from semester to semester. The content may come from a wide range
of disciplines but will provide specific topics in specific content or on career building skills including, but not limited to
topics related to the Holocaust, genocide, museum studies, or education.

END

HGS 70537:

Holocaust and Genocide Education Program Evaluation and Creation

Prerequisites: HGS 70507

This course provides students with the knowledge and skills they need in order to, first, evaluate existing curricula and
programming being used to teach about the Holocaust and other genocides. These include textbooks, but also courses of
study offered by non-profits, films, literature, and museum sites. Students will then create a course of study about the
Holocaust or another genocide grounded in content, based on best practices, and dependent on constructivist pedagogies.

END

HGS 70577:

Student Assessment in Holocaust and Genocide Education

Student assessment and evaluation is an integral part of the teaching and learning process. Teachers are required to use
diverse forms of assessment, for example, to support and communicate progress in learning to students, parents, and
administrators. This course will build on current assessment practices and support students in exploring ways to enhance
assessment directly related to the Holocaust and Genocide.

END

HGS 70597:

Capstone in Holocaust and Genocide Education

This final course of the MA in Holocaust and Genocide Education Studies asks students to conduct research in order to
both produce an applied capstone research project and to show the ways in which this research can be applied to an
educational setting. This applied research might take the form of a classroom curriculum, a museum exhibit, or a program of
education for an NGO (among others).

END

INTR 01451:

Issues in Business: Directed Research

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 AND COMP 01112 AND BUS 01101

An upper-division course for students in the Liberal Studies: Humanities and Social Sciences, Sequence B Perspectives in
Business, Issues in Business: Directed Research is a course that focuses on the current issues and trends in business as found
in the business media. Through this class, students are able to examine the relationship business trends relate with their
other areas of study. As a writing intensive (WI) course, the course is designed to allow students to explore areas of personal
interest through the collection of research and the presentation of such material in written and spoken formats.

END

INTR 01488:

Career Planning And Development

This course will provide students with multifaceted experiences in career planning and development. Students will engage
in self-assessment, career exploration, job search strategies and decision making.

END

INTR 01499:

Bachelor Of General Studies Portfolio

Prerequsites: Enrolled in the General Studies Program.

This course is the portfolio component required for all students in the Bachelor of General Studies Program. Students will
analyze their academic progress through self-reflective assessment. This course is limited to students enrolled in the General Studies Program.

END

INTR 01503:

Seminar On Integrating Mathematics And Science

This interdisciplinary seminar is designed for advanced graduate students with some background in teaching mathematics
and/or the sciences at the elementary and/or middle school level. Students in the course will examine a number of current
scientific issues from the perspective of different sciences and develop and pilot instructional activities relating to those
issues.

END

INTR 11511:

Urban Teacher Residency

END

SE 01501:

Sustainable Engineering Fundamentals

Sustainable Engineering incorporates development and implementation of products, processes, and systems that meet
technical and cost objectives while protecting human health and welfare and elevating the protection of the biosphere as a
criterion in engineering solutions. This course will introduce the role of engineers in sustainability and provide tools to
measure sustainable systems.

END

SE 01502:

Life Cycle Assessment

This course will introduce students to the fundamental principles of Life Cycle Assessment. Students will apply the ISO
14000 standard methodology to perform a life cycle assessment of a product or process. Students will perform assessments
using process-based analysis models, input-output and hybrid approaches of life cycle assessments. Critical Assessments of
published life cycle assessments will be conducted. Extensive use of life cycle assessment software will be required for this
course. Software programs will be used extensively in this course.

END

SE 01503:

Environmental Policy

This course is an introduction to the history, organization, goals, and ideals of environmental policy in America. It
examines the shift in emphasis from nature protection to pollution control to sustainability over the twentieth century and
develops critical tools to analyze changing conceptions of nature and the role of science in environmental policy
formulation. Of central interest is the relationship between knowledge, uncertainty, and political or legal action. Theoretical
approaches are combined with case studies of major episodes and controversies in environmental protection.

END

SE 01504:

Environmental Management

This course deals with integrated environmental management issues and methodologies with a global perspective. Topics
include environmental decision-making from a socio-economic and environmental standpoint, environmental data
collection, analysis, and management techniques for environmental assessment and feasibility case studies. The course is
intended to give students an understanding of current environmental issues and tools for analysis of data for environmental
management. The issues are examined from the worldwide perspectives of science, engineering, business and society. The
course will culminate in an original research project and presentation.

END

SE 01505:

Sustainable Energy

Sustainable Energy is an introduction to the characteristics of a sustainable source of energy. Numerous energy sources will
be investigated to determine their role in a sustainable future. Technologies such as solar, wind, biomass, geothermal,
hydropower and other emerging technologies will be studied. A fundamental concept of the course is that a sustainable
energy source must be technically feasible, economically viable, protect human health and welfare, as well as protect teh
biosphere.

END

JRN 02210:

Journalistic Writing

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course provides an introduction to a wide variety of news writing forms. Students learn how to cover events, conduct
interviews, and write with effective journalistic structure and style.

END

JRN 02313:

Magazine Article Writing

Prerequisites: JRN 02310 or JRN 02210 or PR 06301 or WA 01300 with a grade of C- or better

Students get started as freelance magazine article writers by conceiving article ideas, interviewing, researching, and writing.
The course provides instruction in adjusting style and slant to reach potential readers. Students learn to sharpen writing,
resolve clarity problems, and add vigor to writing. The course analyzes freelance markets. Students submit work for
publication.

END

JRN 02314:

Photojournalism

Prerequisites: 45 credits required

This course covers the practices and techniques used by photojournalists on modern American newspapers. Students take
digital photographs and edit in Photoshop. Weekly laboratory assignments are required.

END

JRN 02319:

Media Ethics

Prerequisites: JRN 02205 or RTF 03295 or PR 06301

Media Ethics examines decision-making in media professions. The course examines the moral aspects of media conduct,
and helps the student develop a more complete understanding of not only the historical background of ethics, but how the
interplay of politics, science, economics, law, philosophy, and other disciplines have influenced the way we view right and
wrong. The course also strengthens analytical skills as they relate to ethical decisions, cultivating a perception of how media
professionals come to a decision and the many factors that influence that decision.

END

JRN 02321:

Digital Journalism I

Prerequisites: JRN 02205 or RTF 03295 or PR 06301

This course provides an introduction to the digital news landscape. Students perform original reporting and a series of
writing, photo, audio, video and social media news assignments.

END

JRN 02332:

The Publishing Industry

Prerequisites: 75 credits required

The Publishing Industry examines the business and practice of publishing through broad readings and research related to
industry operations and trends, field trips, guest speakers, interactive projects, and directed discussion. Students explore
publishing aspects of books, magazines, newspapers, online material, blogging, podcasting, self-publishing, and editing.
When students complete this course, they will have a better idea of the career path they would like to pursue.

END

JRN 02335:

Media Law

Prerequisites: 45 credits required

This course examines laws that deal with the legal responsibilities of print, broadcast, online and film media as well as
public relations and advertising practitioners. Students analyze topics such as libel, privacy, broadcast regulations, and
copyright.

END

MAWR 02510:

Writing For Broadcast

This course teaches students how to write scripts and script segments for radio, TV and documentary film. Exercises
include use of broadcast style, writing for audio and video, dialogue, narrative, attribution, and structure. The goals of this
class are to expose students to techniques common in all news and documentary writing and to integrate the use of cameras
and microphones with the spoken word.

END

BLED 40505:

Issues And Innovations In Foreign Language Education

This course is designed for educators responsible for planning and supervising the foreign language curriculum K-12. The
course deals with the issues of sequential curriculum development in foreign languages in keeping with state and national
standards. Emphasis is placed on innovations resulting from implications of research in second language acquisition, the
interrelationship of language and culture and models for foreign language curriculum development. Topics include modes of
communication, aspects of culture, scope and sequence of content, and curriculum evaluation.

END

BLED 40510:

Issues Of Language And Cultural Diversity In ESL/Bilingual Programs

This course focuses on foundational theories and areas of research related to the field of TESOL and bilingual education.
Special emphasis is placed on the forces affecting students and policies related to second language schooling in state,
national and international contexts. Students will develop a reflective philosophy for educating English Language learners.

END

BLED 40512:

Linguistics And Second Language Acquisition For Teaching Languages

This course addresses basic concepts of linguistic theory and second language acquisition research. Students will compare
and contrast second language acquisition pradigms and investigate their applicability to the classroom. Discussion will also
focus on components of the language system in the context of second language teaching.

END

BLED 40515:

Understanding Immigrant-Origin Students: Language, Culture, and Mobility

In this course, students examine the experiences and identities of immigrant-origin and emergent bilingual students,
focusing on language, culture, immigration, and transnationalism. Special issues related to socioeconomic status, race,
religion, disability, gender, and forms of discrimination that immigrant-origin students encounter are addressed. Students
also examine advocacy issues and ways to support partnerships with families and communities.

END

BLED 40517:

Modern Developments In ESL/Bilingual Education

This course examines the implications of current theoretical positions regarding second language acquisition for program
development and instruction. The course deals with a range of methodologies, the selection of content, instructional
techniques, the selection and use of materials, and the development of alternative assessment measures.

END

BLED 40520:

Planning, Teaching, And Assessment In ESL Classrooms

This course concentrates on how teachers plan, teach, and assess in ESL classes. Students will create unit plans that
incorporate both language and content area objectives and learn a variety of research-based instructional methods to
support language acquisition and student learning.

END

BLED 40521:

Teaching Bilingual/Bicultural Education: Process And Practice

The course examines current programs and available materials in bilingual education appropriate to a range of content
areas and grade levels. Microteaching and peer coaching are practiced to provide a basis for reflective teaching. The course is
open to candidates who possess or are eligible for a standard or provisional New Jersey instructional certificate.
State-approved examinations in oral and written English and the target language are required for certification.

END

BLED 40522:

Integrating Language And Content In The ESL/Bilingual Education Classroom

This course examines the theory and practice of integrating language and content in K-12 ESL, bilingual and content-area
classrooms. Specific focus is given to methods pertaining to implementing sheltered instruction modles, content-based ESL,
students' proficiency levels, proficiency testing, and strategies for collaborating with other teachers and school leaders.

END

BLED 40523:

Practicum In Teaching English As A Second Language

Corequisite: BLED 40520

This course is offered as a corequisite to Teaching ESL: Process and Practice (BLED 40.520). The course will consist of a
field experience in teaching English as a Second Language (ESL) and an accompanying class that focuses on reflective
evaluation of that field experience. Candidates currently teaching English language learners will use their own classes for the
field experience. Candidates not currently teaching English language learners will be assisted in placement for the field
experience.

END

BLED 40524:

Clinical Internship In English As A Second Language

Prerequisites: BLED 40510 AND BLED 40512 AND BLED 40515 AND BLED 40520 AND BLED 40523AND BLED 40522 (40522 may be taken concurrently)

This field-based course provides the teacher education candidate with opportunities to demonstrate the subject content,
professional knowledge, pedagogical skills, and dispositions that are developed in program course work. The Clinical
Internship experience is a supervised, full-time activity conducted in a public elementary, middle or high school ESL
classroom. Successful completion of the Internship requires demonstrated mastery of subject area content, lesson planning,
and multiple instructional strategies to meet varied student needs; demonstrated ability to assess learner progress and
modify instruction accordingly, ability to manage all aspects of classroom activity, ability to work collaboratively with all
instructional, administrative, parental, and community members of the classroom and school community, and ability to
document evidence of doing all of the above. Admission to this course requires completion of all previous Teaching ESL
coursework, including a minimum program grade point average of 3.0.

END

CASE 90512:

Examining Intersectionality in Critical Theories of Race, Class, Gender, Sexuality
and Citizenship

This course provides an overview of intersectionality and selected theoretical lineages which intersectionality often draws
from including feminism, critical theory, critical race theory, ethnic studies, queer studies, nationalism, and
de/post-colonialism. Beyond studying and summarizing relevant work, the course challenges students to critically synthesize
and apply these frameworks to the study of urban education and communities.

END

CASE 90513:

History of Urban Education and Communities

This course surveys the varied relationship of urban education and communities within the broader history of the rise of
urban cities. In doing so, the course critically examines the history of urban communities and schools through various
analytic frameworks attending to concepts of space, race, class, culture, language, and citizenship, as well as how these
theories have been taken up in the analysis of urban education and communities. The course focuses on the intersection of
urban social movements, communities, policies, and practices as related to public schooling the United States.

END

CASE 90514:

Education Reform in the US: Theories of Change

This course will engage students in a critical conversation guiding the work of education reform in the United States. The
content will center on the complexity of the myriad systems that impact educational opportunities and outcomes, from
economic policy to employment, housing to transportation, parenting to early education, access to healthcare and healthy
choices, criminal activity and neighborhood safety, exposure to violence and environmental toxins. Students will explore the
complexity of changing individual behavior and social systems, by examining the interactions between all of the forces at
play in urban environments.

END

CASE 90519:

Urban Inquiry and Social Justice Research Methods

In this methods course, students begin by exploring researcher positionality to understand how epistemological
assumptions influence how and the extent to which researchers are able to conduct quality studies. By drawing on various
works, such as common typologies of cross-cultural researchers (Banks), epistemological racism in research, (Scheurich and
Young), and various unseen, and unforeseen dangers in conducting research in racially and culturally diverse settings
(Milner), students are encouraged to recognize the importance of researchers’ roles in advancing social justice through sound
research. Accordingly, students investigate different modes of inquiry, not to choose one way of “doing” research but to
understand how methods can complement each other given the appropriate lens and approach. Within each of these modes
of inquiry, students examine how data (e.g. observations, interviews, field notes, documents, artifacts, and various large data
sets) can work for or against social justice.

END

CASE 90524:

Capstone Thesis Project

This course serves as the final project for students in the Urban Education and Community Studies MA. Students will be
required to choose a research question, develop a study, collect and analyze data, write and defend a research thesis paper.
The topic of the research study will be chosen and developed in consultation with a faculty advisor.

END

CASE 90531:

Critical Consciousness: Sharing Power and Voice with Students

Students will learn to use dialogic instructional strategies to create student-teacher partnerships that respect student voice
and affirm the lived experiences of students. Participants will learn strategies to engage students and themselves in critical
inquiry about identify, privilege, and social justice, and to share power and voice in their classrooms.

END

CASE 90532:

Working with Families and Communities

This course will help teachers to develop a robust, critical, and theory-based understanding of the interaction of families
and schools. Students will also learn to work collaboratively within their schools to equitably and purposefully engage with
the families of their students and the communities surrounding their schools. By the end of this course, students will
develop a set of research questions and vignettes for a community-based participatory research project. Students will
identify and closely examine several models of family and community engagement in schools, connecting these models with
current school and classroom practices of engaging with families and communities. Students also will engage in coursework
toward two products: 1) a conceptual framework for interacting with families as education professionals, and 2) analysis and
reconstruction of a school-based family and community event.

END

CASE 90533:

Critical Pedagogy

The theoretical framework for this course builds upon conceptualizations of critical pedagogy that supports educators to
challenge traditional beliefs about the ways that school works. This requires a commitment to the construction of
knowledge by sharing power and authority between students and teachers, challenging the hegemonic or “common sense”
notions of what school is and should be, and sharing control of the curriculum and pedagogy of the classroom.

END

CASE 90540:

Urban Education Policy and Reform

Urban educational leaders need to be able to explore the past to see how knowledge was perceived, valued, transmitted,
received, and validated within educational institutions, and the dynamics that drove changes over time. In this course,
students will be required to critically analyze an educational policy issue uncovering the context (history, research, politics),
determining how the policy was implemented and what the outcomes were, intended as well as unintended.

END

CASE 90541:

Leadership for Social Justice and Educational Equity

In this course, students will develop a deeper understanding of leadership, including our own personal philosophy of
leadership. We build this as we seek to understand our own experiences and the experiences of historically marginalized
groups of the extended school community along with the historical, philosophical, and political forces that have led to
inequities. By critically analyzing current conditions, we can use our role as leaders to develop policies, curriculum and
relationships to create access and opportunities for children, teachers and families fully participate and succeed as
learners/citizens in formal and informal educational communities.

END

CASE 90542:

Engaging in Education and Community

This course will look at the theoretical foundations and critical issues of advocacy, elements of advocacy planning, and
strategies for action. Students will deepen their understanding of advocacy tools, processes and models to utilize advocacy in
practice. A primary focus will be on the connection of community organizations and schools, with a focus on developing
inclusive, collaborative processes that include a variety of stakeholders and engage a range of strategies. Students will review
methods that include leveraging political processes, developing social media campaigns, and developing policy proposals.

END

CASE 90550:

Urban Education & Community Studies Special Topics

This course responds to the emerging challenges and opportunities created by the shifting education policy landscape, and
so will capitalize on current events and shifts in legislation and policy that impact work in urban educational settings.

END

CASE 90551:

Artistic Expression in Action: Building Stronger Communities Through Fine Arts
Outreach

This course is designed to help teachers and/or community leaders learn how to develop and implement responsive,
collaborative, and culturally relevant arts activities capable of being integrated in various culturally and linguistically diverse
settings for the purposes of providing outreach and enrichment. Further, students will examine, create, and experience
specific artistic media that have been used for the purposes of awareness, outreach, and enrichment in hopes of
understanding arts aesthetic and social value.

END

CASE 90710:

Power & Privilege: The Social Construction of Difference

This course is situated within a framework of sociopolitical development, informed by a range of critical theoretical
perspectives, and advanced by an understanding of the nature of both individual and systemic change. Student will explore
how institutions, social systems and individual experiences create and sustain systems of power and privilege that ensure
access for some while excluding others. Students will begin to develop a critical understanding of the cultural, political,
economic, and the institutional forces that perpetuate systems of privilege and oppression, and to develop a critical
consciousness, reflective practice, and commitment to action in relation to the policy, curriculum, pedagogy, and practices
they employ.

END

CASE 98801:

Doctoral Dissertation Continuation

Prerequisites: Student must have completed the 21 required credits for dissertation prior to enrolling in the dissertation continuation course and must have departmental approval.

Continuation of supervised research leading to a doctoral dissertation.

END

EDUC 01270:

Creating Supportive Middle & High School Learning Environments

Prerequisites: SMED 40450

This course will enable Subject Matter Education (SME) teacher candidates to gain an understanding of the effect of the
learning environment on student achievement. Candidates will learn strategies for creating and maintaining a positive
learning environment in which all learners can achieve their potential. The course will focus on student-centered instruction
that promotes civil discourse and strategies to address no-engagement. Clinical (field) experiences will provide the
opportunity for teacher candidates to begin to make the connection between the content of the course and its application in
secondary SME classrooms.

END

EDUC 01272:

Teaching Content in Diverse Classrooms

Prerequisites: SMED 40450

This course will enable Subject Matter Education (SME) candidates to gain a multifaceted understanding of the individual
and institutional elements that impact student achievement and schooling experiences. Candidates will then learn about
specific approaches and instructional practices that they can use in the classroom to promote learning for culturally and
linguistically diverse students, including teaching academic language, differentiating instruction and assessments, and
supporting home, community, and school partnerships.

END

FNDS 21150:

History Of American Education

This course provides an in-depth study of American education from 1600 to the present, covering preschool through
post-secondary education. It focuses on the social forces, sources of conflict, major educational figures and patterns of
schooling during each period. In addition, the course will highlight the ways in which diversity has been accommodated,
marginalized, or rejected in American education. Students will be able to identify and discuss ways in which diversity has
been accommodated, marginalized, or rejected in American education.

END

LIBR 01502:

Survey Of Children's Literature

The course surveys literature for children from birth to age 14, including genre study, major authors and illustrators,
current trends in publishing, issues in criticism, electronic resources related to children's literature, methods of promoting
reading, teaching children's literature to children, and using multicultural children's literature in classrooms and libraries.

END

LIBR 01503:

Survey Of Young Adult Literature

Students will consider the reading and media interests of young people ages 12-18 in view of current information about
adolescence in the United States. Topics covered include major genres, authors, literary qualities, criticism and reviewing,
awards, selection principles, censorship, and promotional techniques for classrooms and libraries.

END

LIBR 01505:

Reference Resources And Services I

Students focus on the provision of reference services as well as the evaluation and use of reference sources in schools and
libraries. Topics covered include characteristics and use of information sources and systems, policies and procedures, basic
reference sources in both print and electronic formats, and skills and attitudes needed to assist diverse individuals in
meeting their information needs.

END

LIBR 01506:

Foundations Of Librarianship

This course introduces the field of librarianship and is the first course students should take in the program. Includes: the
roles of libraries and librarians in society, the history of libraries and communications, models of library service, professional
ethics, and contemporary issues in school and public libraries.

END

LIBR 01507:

Managing Library Programs

The management of school and public library services is the focus of this course. Students learn and apply principles of
library organization, personnel administration, budgeting and finance, facilities and equipment, public relations, policies and
procedures, accountability and evaluation.

END

LIBR 01510:

Library Collections And Resources

The course focus is on issues, practices, and policies in the selection of print, nonprint, and electronic resources in school
and public libraries. Emphases include: intellectual freedom, effective communication through policies, technology
applications, bibliographic aids and review practices, and collection evaluation and maintenance.

END

LIBR 01511:

Organization Of Library Resources

The course studies the library's responsibility to provide physical and intellectual access to print, nonprint, and electronic
resources. Topics include: cataloging and classifying resources according to national standards; use of current technology
resources; evaluating commercial and network sources; and understanding of theories and issues related to the organization
of knowledge.

END

LIBR 01516:

School Media Centers For Teaching And Learning

Focus is on the relationship of the library media program to the school curriculum with emphasis on library/media,
information, and computer skills in the pre-K-12 instructional program. Students observe library media services in school
settings.

END

LIBR 01521:

Design And Production Of Educational Media

Focus is on new and emerging electronic technologies in libraries and media centers. Students use a variety of software to
create such products as databases, library web pages, spreadsheets, presentations, and curriculum and public relations
products. The course includes video technology, Internet searching, copyright and equity issues, and reflective writing.

END

LIBR 01530:

Library Technology

Focuses on planning for school and library technology, funding for technology, system selection, and current issues in
school and library media technology. Study of the role of the library staff in the creation of information and its flow to users.

END

LIBR 01570:

Selected Topics In Librarianship

Designed for in-service school media specialists and public librarians, this course focuses on specific topics or issues
affecting the profession and permits students to explore emerging thinking in the field. Topics vary each time the course is
taught.

END

LIBR 01580:

Practicum In Library Services

Focus is on observation and participation in important aspects of library operations, including selection and organization
of materials; reference and bibliographic services; curriculum development; and techniques of teaching library media use.
This course must be pursued at an approved site under the supervision of an appropriately certified school or public librarian
and a college supervisor.

END

LIBR 01601:

Graduate Thesis In Library Services II

Completion of the research project selected in Graduate Thesis in Library Services I.

END

READ 30120:

Literacies In Today's World

This course will provide students with historical and cultural perspective of how and why people acquire and use literacy to
meet personal and societal needs. By viewing literacy through different lenses students will acquire an understanding of the
interrelationship of language, thought, and social practice.

END

READ 30280:

Teaching Literacy

A basic understanding of the reading process and its relationship to the other language arts is the focus of this course.
Topics pertaining to reading/writing instruction in grades K-12, ranging from emergent literacy to comprehension of
narrative and expository discourse are covered. There is an emphasis on strategies for developing phonemic awareness, word
recognition skills, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension through various instructional settings and across all curricular
areas. The importance of literature-enrichment activities and making curricular connections is highlighted. Field
component is required.

END

READ 30311:

Literacy Pedagogy I

This course explores the broadening nature of literacy and literacy instruction in the 21st century. The course addresses
both the theory and pedagogy of literacy instruction. Topics range from emergent literacy to comprehension of narrative
and expository discourse and address reading and writing instruction that engages students in the K-5 classroom. This
course has a particular focus on designing literacy instruction for culturally and linguistically diverse students that positions
the literacy teacher as a reflective practitioner with a focus on teaching for social justice.

END

READ 30319:

Teaching Reading And Writing In The Content Area

This course helps students integrate reading and writing methods and strategies into subject matter instruction in grades
K-12 ranging from emergent literacy to comprehension of narrative and expository text. There is an emphasis on strategies
for developing phonemic awareness, word recognition skills, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension through various
instructional settings as well as integrating writing to learn strategies. Students acquire understanding for assessing pupil
abilities, selecting suitable materials and fostering language, comprehension, and study skills needed for mastery of academic
subjects. The importance of literature-enrichment acitivities and making curricular connections is highlighted.

END

READ 30320:

Language Development, Emergent Literacy, And Reading In Young Children

Corequisites: ECED 23320 OR INCL 02210

Students will gain an understanding of five phases of Literacy: Awareness and Exploration; Experimental Reading and
Writing; Early Reading and Writing; Transitional Reading and Writing; Independent Reading and Writing. Students will
learn how to integrate literacy across all curricula in the forms of reading, writing speaking, listening, and viewing. They will
be able to identify, assess, adapt and implement a variety of strategies that take into account children with special needs.
Further, students will be able to recognize the impact of cultural, linguistic, and other diversities that affect engagement in
literacy learning and they will be able to identify and utilize effective teaching strategies that address these differences. This
course also requires a weekly field experience in a pre-school setting.

END

READ 30347:

Phonics And Spelling Instruction

Prerequisites: READ 30280 or REED 30280 or READ 30311 or READ 30320

This course prepares prospective teachers to blend evidence-based phonemic awareness, phonics, word identification, and
spelling instruction strategically into an integrated language arts approach to teaching literacy. Major topics include the
development of children's phonic/spelling knowledge; what teachers should know about language; informal techniques to
assess children's early literacy, word identification, and spelling understandings; systematic and meaningfully applied
instruction to meet development, cultural, and linguistic differences; and communicating with parents and professionals
about phonics and/or spelling.

END

READ 30350:

Using Children's Literature In The Reading/Writing Classroom

Prerequisites: REED 30280, READ 30280, READ 30311 or READ 30320

This course prepares prospective teachers to integrate reading and writing in a language arts program through the use of
book selections that reflect quality writing in the genres typically found in children's literature. The course will provide
students with sufficient background and knowledge in children's literature so that they may teach reading by using trade
books, emphasizing process writing and developing thematic units. Language, literacy, and learning will be enhanced by
integrating children's literature across the curriculum.

END

READ 30351:

Literacy Pedagogy II

Prerequisites: READ 30280

This course prepares teacher candidates to provide differentiated literacy instruction in diverse classrooms with a wide
range of developmental levels, instructional needs, interests, and backgrounds. Teacher candidates will learn how to select,
administer, and analyze various assessment tools to inform instruction. Field experience is required.

END

READ 30421:

School Reading Problems-Writing Intensive

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and READ 30347

In this course, students learn to teach struggling readers by applying their knowledge of literacy instruction learned in
prerequisite coursework. They use assessments and observations to identify students' reading levels. Students are required
to use on-going diagnostic teaching techniques to plan, teach, and adjust instruction according to the needs and interests of
struggling learners. Process writing is used throughout. As a course requirement, students work in the Rowan Reading
Clinic. Students tutor a K-12 student for 20 hours and write a final report.

END

READ 30451:

Supervised Clinical Practice In Reading

Prerequisites: READ 30421 or READ 30350

Students in this course apply diagnostic, reflective teaching procedures in order to teach struggling readers in a clinical
setting. They select materials and instructional strategies that meet the specific needs of the child. Emphasis is placed on
on-going, diagnostic teaching that integrates the language arts in instruction that adjusts to the needs and interests of
struggling readers. Students will conduct informal reading assessments at the end of the clinic session in order to write a
formal report that includes assessment data; students' strengths and needs; and recommendations to parents, classroom
teachers, and future tutors for further instruction.

END

READ 30500:

Theory and Practice in Literacy Education

Prerequisites: READ 30515 and READ 30520

This course will examine influential theories and research that address the developmental, cognitive, motivational, literary,
linguistic, sociocultural and sociopolitical foundations of reading. The course considers how leading and often competing
reading theories developed over time and how seminal research has influenced scholars, practitioners and policy makers. In
addition, there is emphasis on research shaping current conversations in the literacy field in which the definitions, purposes
and practices of reading depend on reader characteristics (e.g., English Language Learners, economic class and gender), text
factors (e.g., print vs. electronic, magazines vs. literature), and contextual considerations (e.g., in-school vs. out of school
settings, local vs. federal reading policy).

END

READ 30510:

Teaching Elementary Reading

END

READ 30515:

Teaching Reading And Writing Across The Grades

Students acquire a background in current theory and practices related to emerging literacy, word identification, fluency,
comprehension, study skills, and recreational reading in grades K-12. The relationships between reading and the other
language arts and between reading and other subject areas are addressed. Additionally, students become familiar with
various methods, materials and technology used in teaching reading, assessing reading performance, and organizing and
managing a reading program in the K-12 classroom. This course is required for those seeking the M.A. in reading education
and/or reading specialist certification. Teachers and administrators who wish to increase their knowledge in the K-12
reading curriculum and instruction may also enroll.

END

READ 30520:

Content Area Literacy

This course is designed for reading and non-reading majors interested in increasing knowledge and skills in teaching
reading in the content areas. It is a required course for those seeking an M.A. in reading. Instruction is provided in the
developmental aspects of reading with little emphasis on corrective or remedial practices. The content of the course may be
oriented toward the subject matter areas represented by the students enrolled in the course. Special emphasis is also given to
developing vocabulary, comprehension, and study skills as well as to assessing pupil ability to read content material and to
select suitable materials for instruction.

END

READ 30530:

Teaching Reading to Students with Disabilities

The primary purpose of the course is to present the philosophy of teaching reading to exceptional children along with the
appropriate methods and materials. Major topics include the nature and needs of children who deviate from normal
assessment of reading ability, emerging literacy, the role of parents and the child study team, intervention strategies, settings
for instruction, word recognition, comprehension and study skill techniques appropriate for exceptional learners,
adaptations of methods and materials, and organizational patterns. This course may not be offered annually.

END

READ 30535:

Word Study: Phonics, Spelling, And Vocabulary Instruction

This course develops understandings for teaching phonics, spelling, and vocabulary in integrated language arts classrooms.
The importance of knowing what to teach and when is emphasized. Major topics include: the development of word
knowledge from emergent literacy to adulthood, strategies for instruction, the role of assessment, and parental involvement.

END

READ 30540:

Administration And Supervision Of School Reading Programs

Prerequisites: READ 30515 and READ 30520 and READ 30545

The purpose of this course is to examine the role of the reading specialist in planning, developing, supervising, and
evaluating reading programs at all levels. Major topics include reading program budget planning, components of an overall
reading program, subsystems, special provisions, evaluating teacher performance, planning and conducting in-service
workshops, organizational patterns, planning and preparing district materials, and selection and evaluation of commercial
materials.

END

READ 30545:

Using Multicultural Literature In The K-12 Reading And Writing Classroom

This course will focus on reading and actively engaging with a wide variety of multicultural texts for children and
adolescents. Multicultural literature will be broadly defined to include an examination of difference that looks closely at
those traditionally absent or marginalized in texts for young readers. Course readings will emphasize issues of selection
versus censorship and the ability of multicultural literature to provide enjoyment while allowing for the development of
cultural awareness/sensitivity.

END

READ 30547:

Teaching Literacy to English Language Learners

This course with strong research base and specific instructional strategies, covers the essential topics of first and second
language axcquisition, oral language development, writing, reading, vocabulary, and reading and writing across the
curriculum. Educators need to understand K-12 English language learners' literacy and language acquisition as well as
instructional practices, approaches, and methods that address different cultural and linguistic backgrounds.

END

READ 30550:

Diagnosis Of Remedial Reading Problems

Prerequisites: READ 30540 and READ 30535 and READ 30530; Corequisite: READ 30560

Students in this course will become aware of the factors which influence reading achievement. They will learn to
administer standardized and informal tests to individuals as well as to small groups. Furthermore, they will recognize the
need to modify some procedures for exceptional learners. Throughout the course, the importance of on-going assessment
will be emphasized. Finally, strategies for interpreting and reporting test results will be delineated. As a course requirement,
students will administer selected tests to a student and summarize the results in a report.

END

READ 30552:

Selected Topics In Reading

Such areas as the following are explored: methods and materials for teaching reading and determining reading levels;
influencing factors in reading disability; and differences in teaching varied types of children. Demonstrations, hands-on
experiences and group work are involved. May not be offered annually.

END

READ 30557:

21st Century Literacies in Today's Schools

Prerequisites: READ 30500 and READ 30545 and READ 30535 and READ 30530 and READ 30611 and READ 30552 and READ 30547

This course addresses newly defined literacies in the technological world. Candidates will examine a range of theoretical,
methodological and practical approaches to indentifying and understanding new literacies. They will understand that the
demands of 21st-century literacy are more complex and more challenging that earlier periods in history. The course has as its
focus communication and collaboration both within and outside the course and across various platforms (e.g., blogs, word
press, twitter). Candidates first actively engage in using digital tools themselves, ultimately exploring possibilities with their
students in their individual contexts.

END

READ 30560:

Corrections Of Remedial Reading Problems

Corerequisite: READ 30550 with minimum grade of B

Students in this course become aware of factors that are considered when planning instruction for readers experiencing
difficulty. In planning lessons students design and adapt instructional materials, develop computer-based teaching
strategies, and implement instructional procedures in an integrated language arts perspective. The course instructor
supervises students as they use diagnostic teaching strategies to instruct remedial readers in field-based settings.

END

READ 30566:

Researching Classroom Practice

This course will provide opportunities for students to read and analyze various types of research for the purposes of
improving practice. Students will focus on action research by designing a project that includes selecting the issue,
determining the data to be collected, data analysis and interpretation, and change of teaching and learning behavior.

END

READ 30570:

Clinical Experiences In Reading

Prerequisites: READ 30560

Students plan and execute reading lessons for groups of remedial readers. They integrate the results of testing, observation
and the assessment of reading-related factors in order to devise appropriate sequences of corrective instruction. Students
select and use varied teaching strategies, including remedial techniques in order to adjust to the individual needs of their
pupils. Following weekly observations, students discuss their performance with the instructor. During the seminar portion
of the class, students learn to administer, interpret and evaluate diagnostic instruments. They are taught to use corrective
procedures which integrate the language arts and utilize computers.

END

READ 30599:

Reading Research Seminar I

Prerequisites: READ 30560

This course introduces students to the various paradigms in educational research in literacy. The course focuses on
qualitative methodological research in education, designing teacher research, writing a literature review, developing a
research plan, and obtaining research permissions. The course serves as one course in a two-course sequence for thesis
preparation and writing.

END

READ 30600:

Reading Research Seminar II

Prerequisites: READ 30570 and READ 30599

The most commonly used techniques employed in educational research are studied. Guided reading and discussion of
research articles in reading education are provided. Research studies are analyzed and critiqued with special attention given
to the methodology of the studies. Enrollment is limited to matriculated graduate students with permission of the graduate
advisor.

END

READ 30610:

INTERNSHIP-READING

END

READ 30611:

Literacy Assessment

Prerequisites: None

This course is an examination of various types of literacy problems and the techniques, processes and instruments for
assessing literacy. Topics include the adminstration of a variety of assessment tools and the interpretation of assessment
data for selecting instructional methods, facilitating instructional decisions, monitoring students performance, and
providing intervention based on informed assessment.

END

SECD 03350:

Teaching Students Of Linguistic And Cultural Diversity

Corequisites: ECED 23446 and ECED 23447 or ELEM 02445 and ELEM 02448 or SECD 03435 and SECD 03436

The issues of inclusion form an integral part of a teacher preparation program. The schooling of all children demands that
diversity in multiple forms be addressed in the inclusive classroom, including cultural and linguistic diversity. Knowledge
about diversities and the performance of appropriate instructional strategies are emphasized in this course, and attention is
directed to the sensitivity needed to assist the learning of students of linguistic and cultural diversity.

END

SMED 60550:

Schools & Society: Foundations for Secondary Teaching

This introductory course addresses a number of foundational questions in the field of education, including: Who goes to
school and for what purposes? What is taught and who decides? How are schools organized and who funds them? How are
schools different now than they were 100 years ago? What legal precedents and reform movements have shaped education
today? How are schools in the United States similar to and different from those abroad?

END

SMED 60552:

Teaching Content in Diverse Classrooms

Prerequisites: SMED 60.550

This course will enable Subject Mattere Education candidates to gain a multifaceted understanding of the individual and
institutional elements that impact student achievement and schooling experience. Candidated will investigate the roles the
genger, SES, race, ethnicity, home language, religion, and other indentity-based aspects shape school experiences, learning,
and achievement. Candidates will then learn about specific approaches and instructional practices that they can use in the
classroom to promote learning for culturally and linguistically diverse students, including teaching acadeemic language,
differentiating instruction and assessments, and supporting home, community and school partnership.

END

SMED 60553:

Creating Supportive Middle and High School Learning Environments

Prerequisites: SMED 60.550

This course will enable Subject Matter Education teacher candidates to gain an understanding to the effect of the learning
environment on student achievement. Candidates will learn strategies for creating and maintaining a positive learning
environment in which all learners can achieve their potential. This course will focus on student-centered instructions that
promotes civil discourse and strategies to address non-engagement.

END

SMED 60560:

Curriculum, Instruction & Assessment I

Prerequisites: SMED 60.553 and Corequisite: SMED 60.562

The first of two subject-specific methods courses, this class is designed for teacher candidates majoring in English, the
social studies, or a wold language and planning careers as P-12 teachers. In conjunction with a corequisited residency, this
course includes both campus and public school-based experiences dealing with a range of topics necessary to build a
functioning learning community, including: subject-specific pedagogy, lesson and unit planning, classroom management, and
attention to learning among the diverse populations who attend New Jersey Schools.

END

SMED 60561:

Curriculum, Instruction, & Assessment II

Prerequisites: SMED 60.650 and Corequisite: SMED 60.563

The second of two subject-specific methods courses, this class is designed for teacher candidates majoring in English, the
social studies, or a world language and planning careers as K-12 teachers. In addition to exploring topics addressed in
Curriculu, Instruction, & Assessment I in greater depth, this course places an emplasis on practitioner research, requiring
students to develop inquiry questions about their own practice and to collect and analyze relevant data from the field.

END

SMED 60562:

Clinical Practice I

Prerequisites: SMED 60553; Corequisite: SMED 60560 OR READ 30520 OR SELN 60577

This course is the first of two state-mandated field experiences required for candidates in the MST Program. Candidates
will attend their field placements 3 full days per week during the semester, while taking the corequisite subjects Curriculum,
Instruction, and Assessment I (SMED 60560), Content Area Literacy (READ 30520), and Effective Inclusive Instruction
(SELN 60577). This course is graded as Pass/No Credit, with a “Pass” indicating a grade of C- or better.

END

SMED 60563:

Clinical Practice II

Prerequisites: SMED 60562; Corequisite: SMED 60561

This is the second of the two state-mandated field experiences required for candidates in the MST program. Continuing in
their field placement from Clinical Practice I, candidates will attend their field placements 5 full days per week during the
semester, while taking the corequisite subject Curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment II (SMED 60561).This course is
graded as Pass/No Credit, with a “Pass” indicating a grade of C- or better.

END

SMED 60564:

MST SME Professional Seminar

Prerequisites: SMED 60.562 and Corequisite: SMED 60.561

This is the capstone course in the MST SME and will prepare candidates for their teaching positions by focusing on issues
critical to new teachers. The coures is designed to support candiddates in their final transition from teacher candidate to
treacher. Topics include understanding school climate, developing a professional development plan, developing a plan for
communicating with families, planning for the first six weeks (or unit) of schoiol, and preparing for a substitute teacher.

END

CJ 09510:

Contemporary Issues In Criminal Justice

This is a graduate level course focusing on understanding the criminal justice system both in terms of the uniqueness of
each component (law enforcement, courts, and corrections) and in terms of the complementary nature of the whole,
advances and emerging issues in each component of the criminal justice system and in the system as a whole, research related
to contemporary issues and the practical applications of said research, and a critical assessment of both the research in the
field and the issues facing the criminal justice system.

END

CJ 09511:

Research Methods I

This is a graduate level course focusing on understanding various research methods used in criminal justice, the advantages
and disadvantages of different research methods (including the appropriateness for hypothesis testing), techniques for
conducing research utilizing the appropriate method(s) given a particular question, the ability to critically assess research
studies in the field, and the ability to conduct research for a Master's Thesis.

END

CJ 09512:

Research Methods II

This course will enable students to understand various statistics and statistical techniques used in criminal justice, to
understand the advantages and disadvantages of different statistics, to be able to conduct research utilizing the appropriate
statistic given a particular question and/or set of data, to be able to critically assess research studies in the field, and to be
able to conduct research for a Master's Thesis.

END

CJ 09515:

Law And Society

This course will allow students to understand the basic process for law formation and the obvious and hidden influences on
the creation of American law; to understand the role of laws in American society, in part as a reflection of needs, in part as a
reflection of public/political desires, and in part as tools of the powerful; to understand how the complexities in law and its
relationship to society impact on other aspects of the criminal justice system; and to be able to critically assess the formation
of law, the interpretation of law, and the application of law in American socity.

END

CJ 09516:

Administrative Law/Ethics

This course focuses on the relevance of administrative law and ethics as they relate to the decision making process in
criminal justice. Administrative actions and ethical issues permeate the criminal justice system. As such, students will be
exposed to Administrative Law, including discussion of key principles of Administrative Law, limiting doctrines, and
particular agency rules. Students will also spend time studying ethics. Discussions may include police corruption,
prosecutorial misconduct, ethical issues in sentencing, prison corruption, and ethics in the creation and implementation of
crime control policy.

END

CJ 09517:

Criminal Justice Policy Analysis

This course will enable students to understand the importance of program and policy evaluation, to understand how to
evaluate programs and policies with several outcome measures, to be aware of the effectiveness of current criminal justice
policies and procedures, and to be able to evaluate a current criminal justice policy or procedure using primary or secondary
data.

END

CJ 09518:

Contemporary Developments In Theory

This course will allow students to understand the modern development of criminal justice theory, to understand current
approaches in theory, including strengths and weaknesses of various theoretical perspectives, to be able to conduct research
guided by theory, and to be able to critically assess research studies in the field.

END

CJ 09519:

Seminar In Criminal Justice Planning

This course focuses on the techniques of program and policy planning and evaluation. Students will focus on existing
criminal justice programs and policies while at the same time learning the process of proper program and policy evaluation.
Specifically, students will learn how to plan change through a series of steps: problem analysis, creating time-bound and
measurable goals and objectives, designing a program or policy, developing action plans, developing a monitoring plan,
developing an evaluation plan and instrument and finally how to initiate the program or policy. Where appropriate, students
will conduct their analysis on existing and policies as well as creating their own plans as outlined above.

END

CJ 09520:

Courts And Supportive Agencies

This course deals with cases that come from both juvenile and adult courts and which often result in referrals to supportive
social agencies. Included are an analysis of the services provided by supportive agencies, such as foster home services,
substance abuse services or anger management services, as well as witness decorum while providing reports to a court, such
as presentence investigation reports.

END

CJ 09521:

Prevention And Rehabilitation

This graduate seminar will include in-depth study of the theory and research on the causes of criminal behavior; the legal,
ethical, and practical issues involved in working with offenders; and classification and treatment in the correctional context.
Students will become familiar with the most widely used and effective correctional treatment approaches and empirical
research evaluating programs and policies.

END

CJ 09522:

Seminar In Violence

This graduate seminar will include an in-depth study of current theory and research on the biological, psychological, and
sociological causes of violent behavior. It will examine the various types of violent offenses and the impact of these crimes.
Students will learn to critically assess the empirical research on the causes and impact of violence, and understand the
practical applications of this research.

END

CJ 09523:

White-Collar Crime

This graduate course will include an in-depth study of white-collar crime. White-collar crime has generally been a
neglected topic in criminology and criminal justice, but it has gained more prominence as scholars recognized the costs
associated with white-collar crime and the importance of studying it for prevention purposes. The course will cover a range
of topics from the definitional issues and the problems involved in measuring and collecting data on white-collar crime to
theoretical explanations and the prevention of white-collar crime. Students will learn to critically assess significant research
concerning white-collar crime and understand the practical applications of this research. This course will not be offered
every semester.

END

CJ 09524:

Police And Society

This course will focus on the theories and scholarly studies in policing and apply this knowledge to understanding police
functions in society. The objectives of this course are to understand the police function both in terms of its nature and its
relationship with society, to appreciate advances and emerging theories in policing, and to assess current research in the
field and its implications for the police profession. Students are expected to follow the scientific research process to do
research, write papers, and have informed discussion of current police policies and practices.

END

CJ 09525:

Altruism, Cooperation, And Criminal Justice

This course examines the philosophical and empirical data of altruism and cooperation and relates these fields to the study
of criminal justice organizations. Specifically, we examine whether it is necessary to "be nice" to work in the criminal justice
field. We further examine whether those that are more cooperative and altruistic perform their jobs more effectively and
how relationships between client and worker, and worker and supervisor are influenced by altruistic and cooperative
tendencies of the individuals. Finally, students will collect, analyze, and summarize original data testing the hypotheses
offered within the course.

END

CJ 09526:

Management Of Criminal Justice Organizations

The course focuses on diagnosing criminal justice organizations based on their: structure, purpose, leadership styles,
rewards and motivations, relationships and communication theories, decision-making processes, goals and objectives.
Students learn how to assess the effectiveness of various criminal justice agencies based on the aforementioned concepts and
will also learn how to integrate planned change to a criminal justice organization. Criminal justice organizations exist in
different political and legal environments than private, for-profit institutions and students learn how to assess these
differences and gain an understanding of how criminal justice organizations work at the organizational and individual level.

END

CJ 09527:

Gender & Crime

This graduate course will include an in-depth study of gender issues in criminal justice system. The class will start with a
historical view of female criminality and then examine the empirical reality of female offending. Discussions will cover
theoretical explanations for female offending and the processing of female offenders throughout the criminal justice system,
from arrest to parole. Students will also learn about females as victims of crime and their experiences with criminal justice
system. Further, the class will explore the issues faced by female professionals employed within the criminal justice system.
Students will also learn how to critically assess the current information on female offenders and victims in order to
determine the best way to address their needs and issues.

END

CJ 09528:

Seminar In Juvenile Justice And Delinquency

This course will examine the biological, psychological, and sociological factors that increase the risk of juvenile
delinquency, and how the justice system has reacted to crime committed by young people. Topics such as early intervention,
protective factors, diversion, gangs, research based rehabilitation programs, and transfer to adult court will be examined.
Students also will learn to critically assess and design evaluations of prevention and rehabilitation programs designed for
juveniles.

END

CJ 09529:

Community Justice

This course will examine how the community can work with police, courts, and correctional agencies to prevent crime and
rehabilitate and reintegrate offenders. It will examine the effect on implementing community programs of the
organizational environment and effective recruitment, screening, and training of community members. Techniques such as
participatory management, collaboration, problem solving, and mediation will be examined. Students also will learn to
critically assess and design evaluations of community programs.

END

CJ 09530:

International Criminal Law Seminar

This graduate course will include an in-depth study of international crimes and the international criminal process. It will
examine the various types of international criminal offences, the impact they have on the international community, and the
international legal consequence for such crimes. Students will learn to critically analyze historical international cases and
understand case precedents and their future impact on international criminal law.

END

CJ 09531:

Sentencing: Philosophy and Policy

This graduate level course introduces the student to the broad range of topics inherent within criminal justice sentencing.
The course covers the major theories of sentencing, including: retribution, deterrence, incapacitation and rehabilitation.
We delve into the philosophy of each major form and examine the moral, ethical and practical limitations and advantages of
each. Students examine theoretical and empirical writings and are expected to write a major paper based on a relevant
sentencing issue. The course also examines sentencing policy in the United States, and in other countries, with particular
attention paid to the intended and unintended consequences of major sentencing initiatives such as: guidelines, recidivist
statutes, mandatory penalties and other current sentencing policies.

END

CJ 09532:

Race, Ethnicity, Class & Justice

This graduate course will include an in-depth study of race, ethnicity and class, and their evolving impact upon the U.S.
criminal justice system, as well as the system's impact on minorities, the poor, and their communities. A major focus of this
course will be a critical examination and analysis of how race, ethnicity, and class have impacted the nature, content, and
quality of justice that is rendered within the nation. One major purpose of our study is to provide students with an
opportunity to gain sophisticated understanding of the inequities that minorities experience within our system of justice
and in the wider community. Students will learn to critically assess significant research concerning race, ethnicity and class
and the criminal justice system, and understand the practical applications of this research.

END

CJ 09600:

INDEPENDENT STUDY

Prerequisites: None

There is no description for this course

END

CJ 09601:

Master's Thesis In Criminal Justice I

This course requires students to design and begin implementing their own research project to be used to satisfy the
program's thesis requirement. Under the guidance of a member of the Law and Justice Department faculty who agrees to
serve as Thesis Advisor, the student will develop a Research Proposal that will consist of an introduction and Statement of
the Problem, a Literature Review, a Data and Methods Section, and a brief summary of the proposed research. The student
will defend this Research Proposal in front of the Master's Thesis Committee, and will begin implementing the research
after obtaining the Committee's approval.

END

CJ 09602:

Master's Thesis In Criminal Justice II

This course requires students to complete the research project they began in Master's Thesis in Criminal Justice I in order
to satisfy the program's thesis requirement. Under the guidance of a member of the Law and Justice Department faculty
who has agreed to serve as Thesis Advisor, the student will collect their data or obtain secondary data, analyze the data, and
write the results, discussion and conclusion, and references section. They will combine their work from Master's Thesis I
and II into a completed thesis which they will present to the Master's Thesis Committee for approval.

END

LAWJ 05120:

Introduction To Security

This course presents the organization and management of the security function in industry, business, government and
institutions. It also covers the protection of personnel, facilities and other assets as well as the administrative, legal and
technical problems of loss prevention and control.

END

LAWJ 05175:

Survey Of Criminal Justice

This general education approved social science elective course deals with the nature of crime and criminal responsibility,
and elements of social control. It also surveys the criminal justice process from original law enforcement contact through
the judicial and correctional phases. It includes professional roles and opportunities in the criminal justice field.

END

LAWJ 05200:

Introduction To Corrections

This course studies the historical development of correctional practices in the handling of criminals from early to modern
times. Students survey contemporary correctional organized structures and treatment processes, as well as institutional and
community based programs and problems.

END

LAWJ 05201:

Introduction To Courts

This course covers the organization of both the state and federal court systems; the management and administration of
those courts; the relationship of courts to the police, corrections, and community; the criminal trial process, including
pre-trial and post-trial processes; and the judiciary and judicial power, including the areas of separation of powers and
judicial behavior.

END

LAWJ 05202:

American Police

This course covers the philosophy and history of the police role in society. It surveys organizational forms and basic
procedures of police work; police ethics and professional preparation for law enforcement; and, major police problems
confronting the police today.

END

LAWJ 05205:

Minorities, Crime And Criminal Justice

In this course students critically examine the involvement of minorities with crime in the U.S. both as perpetrators and
victims. Additionally, they will be afforded the opportunity to understand, critically examine, and apply significant
theoretical perspectives for the study of minority criminality. They will develop an understanding of the impact of race and
class within the law-making process, the content of the law, and the quality of justice afforded minorities within the
American criminal justice system.

END

LAWJ 05210:

Restorative Justice

This course surveys the major theoretical and applied concepts of Restorative and Community Justice. Students will
examine how the Restorative and Community Justice processes differ from the traditional, retributive criminal justice
system and how Restorative Justice models attempt to benefit the victim, offender and the community. Some of the issues
to be covered are: informal justice practices, reintegrative shaming, forgiveness and resentment, and the efficacy of
Restorative and Community Justice initiatives. Additionally, students may have opportunities to interact with adjudicated
youth from New Jersey's Restorative Justice Project.

END

LAWJ 05220:

Victimology

This course gives students insight into the "forgotten" party in a crime, the victim. The course covers victims' rights in the
Justice System with specific coverage of the following: the social, economic and racial impacts of crime on victims; victims
and courts; police reaction to victims; restitution; offender accountability and the dramatic increase in victims programs and
services.

END

LAWJ 05255:

Criminal Law

This course offers a comprehensive review of the major common law and statutory crimes including homicide, rape and all
related personal and property offenses. The students will be introduced to domestic violence offenses. Considerable
attention is given to the social, moral and constitutional frameworks of the criminal law with a review of recent and standard
judicial interpretations. It also offers a review of defenses and mitigation.

END

LAWJ 05274:

Criminal Justice And Community Relations

This is a broad-based course on the relationship between the community and crime and the criminal. The course covers
such topical areas as police-community relationships, the culture of the inner city, human service delivery systems, the role
of citizen and business groups and the criminal justice system, and the various ways in which criminal justice agencies have
an obligation to the community at large.

END

LAWJ 05276:

Parole, Probation And Community Corrections

A comprehensive review of the noninstitutional response to criminal behavior, this course covers probation, parole and
community corrections in depth. It includes topics like work release, education release, half-way houses, drug and alcohol
centers, legal aspects of these processes and the effectiveness of these programs.

END

LAWJ 05285:

Criminal Investigation

Students study the criminal investigation process. Analysis of problems encountered in interviewing, interrogating and
investigating is included. The course covers investigative techniques that may be applied to investigative problems and
develops application of criminal investigation theories to the administration of justice.

END

LAWJ 05290:

Forensic Law

This class offers a comprehensive analysis of legal issues involving forensic techniques in the justice systems. This course
examines the importance of admissibility, relevance and materiality as it relates to the evidence and the various experts in
Forensics. The topics include bloodstain patter and trace evidence, pathology and gunshot wounds, DNA fingerprinting,
micrography, postmortem determinations and case studies in Forensic Science.

END

LAWJ 05305:

Law And Evidence

This course covers the basic principles of criminal evidence, including burdens of proof, judicial notice, presumptions,
testimonial privileges and hearsay; the rule of exclusion of evidence, confessions, identifications and electronic
eavesdropping; and the use of physical and demonstrative evidence including fingerprints, exhibits, photographs, documents
and writings, scientific evidence and the polygraph.

END

LAWJ 05310:

Criminal Jurisprudence

Students study the history and philosophy of modern criminal law. This course covers problems of contemporary
jurisprudence and especially the typology of constitutional issues as it relates to due process and its requirements.

END

LAWJ 05312:

Criminal Procedure II

This course will examine the legal procedures by which the criminal justice system operates. Students will assess United
States Supreme Court opinions so as to explore issues related to the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Eighthm, and Fourteenth
Amendments to the Constitution, including pre-trial processes, speedy trial, the prosecution function, bail, the
identification of suspects, the right to counsel, the adjudication process, the law of confessions and interrogation, and the
privilege against compelled selp-incrimination. This course has two primary objectives. The first is to introduce students to
the analysis of judicial opinions, a primary sourse of law in the American legal system. The second is to become familiar with
both the fundamental doctrines of constitutional criminal procedure and the important policy issues that emanate
therefrom.

END

LAWJ 05315:

Criminal Justice And Social Conflict

This course covers the major crises in our basic American institutions. Students examine the various aspects of social
mobility, population explosion, social stratification, sex revolution, militarism, and the generation gap as they relate to
problems of social justice in our society.

END

LAWJ 05320:

Civil Aspects Of Law Enforcement

Students undertake an analysis of those areas in civil law with which law enforcement professionals frequently encounter.
Topics include family law, torts, administrative and environmental issues, property disputes, liens, business and consumer
transactions.

END

LAWJ 05322:

Drugs And Crime In America

This course explores and analyzes the relationship between illegal drugs and crime and all the relevant issues and
ramifications. These include, but are not limited to: national and international trafficking, control of the problem,
legalization, and explanations for drug use.

END

LAWJ 05324:

Sentencing And The Rights Of The Convicted

Students explore, analyze, and critique the relevant structures, processes, and impacts of criminal sentencing and
sentences. The course is designed to examine critically the relevant political, philosophical and social driving forces of
change and their impacts on the system and society.

END

LAWJ 05325:

Comparative And International Criminal Justice

The course is an introduction to comparative and international criminal justice. It compares the criminal justice system in
the Unit States with other national systems in the five continents and major regions of the world. Areas examined include
crime, criminal law, policing, court processes, and corrections. This course also provides an introduction to the globalization
of crime including terrorism, drug trafficking, human smuggling, and war crimes and the development of domestic and
international efforts in fighting these crimes. The goal of this course is to help students develop comparative and
international perspectives in addressing problems facing the criminal justice system.

END

LAWJ 05326:

International Terrorism

This course explores the historical development of international terrorism and provides a foundational knowledge of
current terrorist groups and their tactics. Specifically, this course introduces the student to the definition, origin, and
evolution of international terrorism; the roles of world-views, ideologies, mind sets, and motivations; and the different types
of terrorism. Students will also study the organization, tactics, operational capabilities and threats posed by terrorist groups.
Finally, the course will introduce the current status of anit- and counterterrorism efforts in the United States.

END

LAWJ 05330:

Problems In World Justice

This multidisciplinary course examines the principles of justice and their application to the criminal justice system and
society at large. Additionally, a critical examination of significant issues and concerns of world justice will be offered.

END

LAWJ 05335:

Criminal Procedure I

This course will examine the legal procedures by which the criminal justice system operates. Students will assess United
States Supreme Court opinions so as to explore issues related to the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution, including
search and seizure of premises and persons, the arrest and detention of suspected criminals, and the remedies available for
constitutional violations. This course has two primary objectives. The first is to introduce students to the analysis of judicial
opinions, a primary sourse of law in the American legal system. The second is to become familiar with both the fundamental
doctrines of constitutional criminal procedure and the important policy issues that emanate therefrom.

END

LAWJ 05337:

Treatment Of The Offender

This course covers the major therapeutic approaches to the correction of criminal and delinquent behavior and a review of
processes and procedures of corrections and of research on the outcome of various treatment approaches. Students analyze
the ethical and legal problems related to rehabilitation in a correctional setting.

END

LAWJ 05342:

Counseling And Guidance Of The Offender

A survey of basic principles and techniques of counseling of offenders, this course includes interviewing, case conferences,
case histories, individual and group counseling, classification procedures, and team treatment participation.

END

LAWJ 05346:

Women, Crime And Criminal Justice

This course covers the many facets of women, crime and criminal justice, including past and present trends of female crime
along with its relationship to the three major components of the criminal justice system: police, courts and corrections.
Furthermore, this course addresses gender as a significant variable in all aspects of society, both criminal and non-criminal.

END

LAWJ 05356:

Criminal Justice Internship I

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112

The course will remove the student from the academic theoretical classroom and place the student into a rich blend of
practical field experiences in various criminal justice or similar agencies. The student must follow strict guidelines set forth
to uphold University and agency rules, policies and expectations.

END

LAWJ 05361:

Introduction To Juvenile Justice

This course covers the history and philosophy of the juvenile justice system, which includes the development of the system
through the 19th and 20th centuries and the decisions rendered by the United States Supreme Court. The student also
scrutinize the various steps in the police, courts and corrections stages of the juvenile justice system.

END

LAWJ 05369:

Theories Of Crime And Criminality

Prerequisites: LAWJ 05175 and 6 credits of Law and Justice Courses

In this course students explore the extent of crime and delinquency in the United States and the full range of relevant
theories of causation. They also synthesize and apply appropriate theories to such concepts and topics as race, social class,
gangs, drugs, family, schools, and neighborhoods.

END

LAWJ 05379:

The "Political Prisoner"

This course examines the causes and significance of the political prisoner concept on the criminal justice system generally
and the U.S. prison systems specifically. The course deals with varying perceptions of different segments of the population
about the existence and scope of this phenomenon in depth.

END

LAWJ 05380:

Criminal Justice Research

Prerequisites: LAWJ 05369

Students study the basic principles of research and statistics. This course undertakes a review of contemporary criminal
justice research projects, emphasizing evaluation of journal studies and basic planning and writing of the research paper.

END

LAWJ 05381:

Crime Mapping and Crime Analysis I

This course introduces students to the fundamentals of crime mapping and crime analysis. This hands on course teaches
students how to use databases, spreadsheets and other tools to analyze crime, produce crime analysis products for police
commanders and how to effectively communicate analysis results to decision-makers. Emphasis is placed on using the
analyses that are learned to influence the thinking of police decision-makers so that they can implement effective responses
to crime and disorder problems.

END

LAWJ 05392:

Criminal Justice Administration

This course provides upper level students with the concepts, theories, and principles of managing and administering
criminal justice organizations. The content of the course is applied to police, courts, and corrections agencies and gives the
student a total system approach to the subject.

END

LAWJ 05395:

The Incarceration Experience

This course focuses on the exploration of various aspects of incarcerating criminals. It includes the history of
incarceration, the prisonization process, prison subcultures, violence and victimization, and the underground prison
economy.

END

LAWJ 05401:

Law And Human Rights

Prerequisites: LAWJ 05175 and 6 credits of Law and Justice Courses

This course reviews individual civil rights and liberties in detail with a particular emphasis on federal-state legislation on
discrimination, substantive and procedural due process materials and 1st amendment problems. Specific attention is given to
the role police, courts and correctional systems play in the enforcement and enhancement of such rights.

END

LAWJ 05415:

Selected Topics In Criminal Justice

This course promotes intensive research and analysis in Special Topics in Criminal Justice. Students engage in either
theoretical or applied research in topics that can be mutually agreed upon between faculty and student. Topics will vary but
may include female criminality, XYY theory, insanity, mental health and the justice systems, advanced security systems or
radical criminology.

END

LAWJ 05469:

Seminar In Law/Justice - Wi

Prerequisites: LAWJ 05175, LAWJ 05255, LAWJ 05380, one of: LAWJ 05200, LAWJ 05201, or LAWJ 05202 and senior standing.

This seminar will cover topics relating to how law and justice are put into practice by the police, courts, and corrections
system. Important issues affecting society and the criminal justice system as a whole will be examined in depth. Students will
be expected to read scholarly work exploring these issues; participate in class discussions; conduct library research; write
short, informal memos and a senior level research paper; present oral reports on their research; and demonstrate their
understanding of assigned readings and the research reported by classmates in a final examination.

END

BUS 01505:

MBA Supervised Internship

This course requires a field experience in government, business, industry or non-profit organizations. Students complete
assignments that prepare them for productive employment upon graduation. The MBA faculty member will partner with
each employer and student to define and enrich the student's work experiences and to monitor and assess the learning
process. This course is integral to the MBA Program and Supervised Internship credits cannot be used to substitute MBA
elective credits.

END

BUS 01518:

Integrative Managerial Skills

This course serves as a keystone course for the M.B.A. program. Key skills, tools, and issues necessary for further study will
be developed and extended. Course topics and techniques include information systems, financial ratios, behavioral,
presentation, team building, quantitative analysis, critical thinking, written communication, legal and ethical issues, and
library research including electronic data bases and internet research.

END

BUS 01521:

Integrative M.B.A. Seminar

A capstone course for the M.B.A. program, it aids students in reinforcing and integrating core courses by studying strategic
audits and process analysis techniques. Student projects will use teams to analyze how organizations use people, operational
management, information systems and financial measurements to achieve strategic and operational effectiveness.

END

BUS 01550:

INDEPENDENT STUDY

Prerequisites: None

There is no description for this course

END

BUS 01600:

Special Topics In Business Administration

Students will study advanced level topics in specific disciplines as identified through participation in indepth seminars on
topics to be determined by faculty in consultation with the Graduate Committee of the College of Business. Students will
complete research or projects on specialized topics in various disciplines in Business Administration. Students may take
each topic only once. This course may not be offered annually.

END

HRM 06500:

INDEPENDENT STUDY:HRM

Prerequisites: None

There is no description for this course

END

HRM 06598:

Special Topics In Human Resources Management

Students will study advanced level topics in Human Resources Management. The exact topics to be covered will change
over time. Contact the MBA office or Management and MIS Department for details.

END

HRM 06605:

Strategic Human Resource Management

Prerequisites: Admission into the MBA Program or Admission into the Certificate of Advanced Graduate Study (CAGS) in Business Management

Strategic Human Resource Management consists of planned organizational activities designed to increase organizational
effectiveness and equity. This course outlines the transformation of HRM from a clerical function to an important strategic
partner of top management. It focuses on the ability of HRM to provide a source of competitive advantage to
forward-thinking organizations.

END

HRM 06677:

PEOPLE ANALYTICS

People analytics is the use of data-driven techniques for managing people. People analytics leads to better decisions and
superior organizational performance. In this course, students will learn how to use people analytic tools to solve workplace
challenges. This course includes a project-based learning component.

END

HRM 06688:

Human Resource Management In Health Promotion

Prerequisites: Admission to the MBA or to the COGS in Human Resource Management

Human resource management consists of planned organizational activities that are designed to improve efficiency and
equity. In this class, health promotion professionals will develop their capabilities as human resource managers and will
enhance their appreciation of human resource management professionals who make the strategic choice to promote
employee health.

END

HRM 06699:

Talent Leadership

Prerequisites: Admission to the MBA or to the COGS in Human Resource Management

Organizations face many challenges when it comes to managing and developing talent. In large organizations, pipelines are
nurtured and developed. In emerging systems, talent acquisition is nimbler and more nuanced. A successful HR professional
must understand the different methods to manage talent based on the organization and how to create a integrated,
systematic approach to attracting, developing, engaging, and retaining critical talent.

END

MGT 01510:

Professional, Legal and Managerial Responsibilities

Admission into the MBA program or admission into the COGS in Business.
In that business leaders have become personally and professionally responsible for the legal and ethical behaviors of the
individuals within their organizations, the need for formal training in ethical and legal decision making is essential. In this
course students will learn how to effectively apply a variety of legal and ethical frameworks within the global marketplace.
Students will also learn appropriate and effective legal and ethical issue reporting practices, principles and responsibilities.

END

MGT 06300:

Organizational Behavior

Prerequisites: Junior standing

This course examines human relations in management. The course studies the concern for both task and process in the
light of structure, goals and human relationships found in organized efforts. It also covers the application of new
management theories in the areas of motivation, leadership and group problem-solving by a variety of means, including
simulation, case studies, and role playing.

END

MGT 06304:

Organizational Change and Development

Prerequisites: MGT 06300 or PSY 08220 or CMS 04260 and Admission to any Business major or CUGS in Management &
Leadership or CUGS in Training & Development

This course studies factors that facilitate or inhibit organizational change as well as research findings and theory which deal
with methods for diagnosing organizational climate, and selecting and utilizing techniques for bringing about change and
overcoming resistance to change. It also analyzes and evaluates roles and strategies used by change agents to initiate
structure and direct organizational change.

END

MGT 06305:

Operations Management

Prerequisites: Grades of C- or better in: STAT 02260 and(MATH 01130 or MATH 03125 or MATH 01140)

This course provides a critical study of the operational functions of the business enterprise. Its topics include capital costs
and investment criteria, plant location and layout, process planning and production design, job designs, work methods and
cost controls.

END

MGT 06310:

Leadership and Supervision for Managers

Prerequisites: MGT 06300 and Admission to the Management major or CUGS in Management and Leadership

The course is designed for undergraduate business students. Course content will cover the theories of business leadership
and supervision- with the focus on first line supervisors. Students will focus on the theory and acquisition of various business
leadership and supervisory tasks and skills necessary to work with other business managers in a global market world and to
supervise workers with diverse backgrounds. These business skills will include establishing workplace goals, organizing work
units for productivity, conducting interviews, giving feedback to subordinate employees, designing and implementing
employee motivation programs, and supervising workteams. By the end of the course, students will be able to effectively
diagnose the complex dynamics of leadership and supervision in business environments and take action as leaders and
supervisors to improve individual and organization performance.

END

MGT 06402:

Business Policy

Prerequisites: MIS 02334 and MGT 98242, MKT 0920 0, MGT 06300, MGT 06305, FIN 04300 and Senior Standing

This capstone course in business policy provides students with an opportunity to integrate what they have learned in
separate business fields and use this knowledge in the analysis of complex business problems. There is an emphasis on the
skills of identifying, analyzing and solving problems which are not pre-judged as being marketing problems, finance
problems, etc. Students are encouraged to consider issues from the viewpoint of general management rather than as a
functional specialist or researcher.

END

MGT 06500:

Designing, Developing, And Leading High Performance Organizations

Students will study and develop skills in interpersonal behavior in organizations and groups. They will learn about issues in
leadership, how groups function, elements of power and influence, conflict management, management of time and stress,
creative and rational problem solving in groups. In addition, they will study theories of motivation and methods of
empowerment in organizations.

END

MGT 06501:

Advanced Operations Management And Strategy

Prerequisites: MBA Foundation Courses

This course is designed to familiarize students with the complexities of operating a manufacturing, as well as a service,
organization. The focus is primarily on gaining a competitive edge by improving functions of operations management.
Concepts and tools pertaining to business forecasting, operations decision-making, resources allocation, location and
capacity planning, inventory control and management, facility layouts, scheduling, project management, and quality control
and management will be covered. Case studies and team projects will also be used to provide practical applications in a
realistic business context.

END

MGT 06502:

International Business And Society

This course addresses numerous aspects of the increasingly global business environment and implications for business
organizations and key stakeholders. Frameworks for comparing political, legal, social, economic, and governmental
differences across nations are utilized. Macro issues include trade theories, trade regimes, roles of governments and global
institutions. Strategies and structures adopted by various types of international firms and functional approaches to
international finance, management, and marketing are also included.

END

MGT 06503:

Organization Development

Students study the application behavioral science in the management of planned organizational change and development.
In addition to the analysis of issues facing the change agent, students also develop skills in implementing and intervening in
the effort to improve organizational effectiveness. This course may not be offered annually.

END

MGT 06507:

Manufacturing and Service Operations Management

Prerequisites: Admission into the MBA program or Business COGs

This course provides an introduction to the field of manufacturing and service operations management. The course aims to
familiarize students with the set of business activities whereby resources, flowing within a defined system, are combined and
transformed to add value in accordance with organizational objectives. OM is one off the three major functions of any
organization, and it is integrally related to all the other business functions in the context of manufacturing and services. The
focus of this course is to provide the students with the tools, technologies, and processes they need to improve their
oraganization's profitability and service by adhering to the ethical norms of the society.

END

MGT 06510:

Strategic Engineering Management

The course introduces engineers to the concepts and application of strategic planning specifically to the roles and
responsibilities of the engineering function in the strategic planning process for high-tech firms.

END

MGT 06515:

Employee Engagement and Performance

Engaged employees have positive attitudes towards their jobs and employers and they are willing to do whatever it takes in
order to get work done well. This course will introduce Masters of Business Administration students to the science behind
employee engagement. Students are encouraged to take additional Management courses in order to enhance their employee
engagement skills.

END

MGT 06519:

Leadership In Health Promotion

The course is designed for graduate students in the M.A. in Wellness and Lifestyle Management program. Course content
will cover the theories of leadership in health promotion and the focus of this course will be on leadership from a variety of
perspectives - - health organizational leadership in the external environment, as well as leadership at the top, middle and
lower levels inside organizations. Students will focus on the theory and implementation of various health leadership tasks
and responsibilities including working with other leaders in a multinational world, supervising workers with diverse
backgrounds. These leadership skills will include establishing workplace goals, organizing work units for productivity,
conducting interviews, giving feedback to subordinate employees, designing and implementing employee motivation
programs, changing organization culture, the capacity to lead globally, leading work teams and managing workforce
diversity. By the end of this course, students will be able to effectively diagnose the complex dynamics of leadership in health
organizational environments and take action as leaders and to improve individual and health organization performance.

END

MGT 06520:

Global Leadership And Organization Culture

The course is designed for graduate business students. Course content will cover the theories of business leadership and
the focus of this course will be on leadership from a variety of perspectives--organizational leadership in the external
environment, as well as leadership at the top, middle and lower levels inside organizations. Students will focus on the theory
and implementation of various business leadership tasks and responsibilities including working with other leaders in a
multinational world, supervising workers with diverse backgrounds. These business skills will include establishing workplace
goals, organizing work units for productivity, conducting interviews, giving feedback to subordinate employees, designing
and implementing employee motivation programs, changing organization culture, the capacity to lead globally, leading work
teams and managing workforce diversity. By the end of the course, students will be able to effectively diagnose the complex
dynamics of leadership in business environments and take action as leaders and to improve individual and organization
performance.

END

MGT 06521:

Leadership Theory and Practice

Prerequisites: Graduate Standing or Permission from Instructor.

The elective course is designed for graduate in MBA Management program students. Course content will cover the
theories of leadership and practice. The focus of this course will be on a leadership influence on organizational concept and
practices from a variety of perspective in the external environment, as well as leadership at the top, middle, and lower levels
inside organizations. Students will be able to perform analysis of the dark side of leadership, destructive patterns of
leadership behavior, and multiple intelligences. Furthermore, students will be able to understand the psychology of
leadership, including the role of personality, employee motivation, and dealing with difficult people, importance of ethics,
empowerment of employees, managing diversity in the work culture, the theory of creating a powerful vision, helping
employee through change and burnout prevention, leadership in negotiation and alliances, leading and developing teams,
and understand professional performance and sustaining discipline. By the end of the course, students will be able to
effectively diagnose the complex dynamics of leadership, provide execution for organizational success, use effective theory,
alignment, prioritization, in organizational environments and take action as leaders to improve individual, organization
performance, and profitability.

END

MGT 06530:

Sustainable Commerce

Prerequisites: Must be enrolled in a graduate program in the Rohrer College of Business; may be waived by the chair of Management andEntrepreneurship.

Students will examine the notion of “sustainable business” in this course. Students will learn about different types of ‘green’
and sustainable businesses and evaluate many case studies of businesses that have been successful in improving their
environmental and social performance while also remaining profitable. Students will gain an understanding of social
venturing and continue to develop their entrepreneurial skillsets and mindsets. Students will develop their own approaches
to evaluating the sustainability of a business while also learning about emerging norms and frameworks. Students will
examine sustainability as a concept impacting all aspects of a business, from operations and product design to finance,
marketing, and human resources management. The impacts of “green” industries, products, and business practices are also
examined. This course may be offered online.

END

MGT 06531:

SUSTAINABILITY ASSESSMENT

Must be enrolled in a graduate program in the Rohrer College of Business; this requirement may be waived by the chair of Dept. of
Management and Entrepreneurship.
Students will learn different approaches for setting sustainability goals, measuring progress towards sustainability
outcomes, and managing so-called “sustainability transitions”. Students will learn about the increasingly important role of
sustainability officers in different firms, and gain exposure to concepts and practices in sustainability reporting for both
shareholder, regulatory, and scientific purposes. This course may be offered online. Students will learn different approaches
for setting sustainability goals, measuring progress towards sustainability outcomes, and managing so-called “sustainability
transitions”. Students will learn about the increasingly important role of sustainability officers in different firms, and gain
exposure to concepts and practices in sustainability reporting for both shareholder, regulatory, and scientific purposes. This
course may be offered online.

END

MGT 06532:

Topics in Sustainability Innovation and Problem Solving

Prerequisites: Enrolled in College of Business graduate program

Students in this seminar/practicum type class will study the implementation of sustainability transitions, in the context of
current events and emerging ideas related to sustainability studies. Students will identify industries and/or societal
challenges that could benefit from sustainability thinking and develop plans for implementing a new product, system, or
structure. This course may not be offered every year. This course may be offered online.

END

MGT 06555:

Personal Leadership

Prerequisites: Graduate Standing

The emphasis of this new course will be on developing core leadership principles and their application in a leadership
context. Particular emphasis will be on the conceptualization of personal leadership development, developing personal
strategies and planning, developing personal leadership theory, developing personal leadership decision making process,
developing personal motivation, developing personal empowerment, developing personal leadership change process,
developing personal leadership coaching, developing personal leadership governance and implementation, and effectively
and efficiently lead organizations or industry.

END

MGT 06567:

Responsible Leadership: Aligning the Interests of Stakeholders, Profit, & Planet

This course prepares leaders to act as responsible leaders, and understand responsible leadership as successful stakeholder
alignment. The objective of this course is to familiarize students with the challenges and opportunities of responsible
leadership. In this course, students will discuss the challenges of leading in a responsible and sustainable manner and
examine the relationships between successful businesses, sustainability, ethics and positive societal impact. Students will
learn how businesses can create long-term value by considering how organizations operate holistically in ecological, social
and economic contexts.

END

MGT 06599:

Special Topics In Management

Students will study advanced level topics in management. The exact topics to be covered will change over time. Contact
the MBA office or Management and MIS Department for details.

END

MGT 06601:

Strategic Planning For Operating Managers

This course prepares the operating manager for the responsibilities of performing strategic planning. The course will
identify what goes into and how strategic planning is performed. Strategy formation and evaluation will be assisted by
computer decision models and management games. The interrelationships of organizational units and pro-active
management posture with respect to environmental forces will be stressed. This course may not be offered annually.

END

MGT 06603:

Process Analytics

Prerequisites: Admission to the MBA program and MKT 09575

This course introduces the fundamental Lean Six Sigma principles that underlay modern continuous improvement
approaches for industry, government and other organizations. Process analytics introduces a different domain of
quantitative analytics in understanding, improving, and creating processes, and it is critical for managers and business
professionals to use the knowledge and tools to create competitive advantage. This course covers fundamental and applied
knowledge on process analytics – including process data acquisition, analysis, matching and models in modern process
analytics.

END

MGT 06629:

Managing Organizational Strategy

Prerequisites: FIN 04500 Financial Decision Making and (MGT 06515 Employee Engagement and Performance or MGT 06500

Designing, Developing, and Leading High Performance Organizations) and (MGT 06567 Responsible Leadership or MGT 01510
Professional Legal and Managerial Responsibilities) and (MGT 07550 Operations Analytics or MGT 07500 Prescriptive Analytics or
MGT 07600 Predictive Analytics) and (MKT 09511 Marketing Management Fundamentals or MKT 09500 Marketing Management)
As understanding organizations in the context of their general and competitive environments is vital, future managers must
learn how to utilize the perspectives and frameworks designed for strategic analyses and decision making. In this course
students will learn how to conduct analyses across organizational functions and levels and effectively manage goals and
strategies for different types of organizations.

END

MGT 06666:

Managing Engineering Teams

Prerequisites: Admission to the Master of Engineering Management Program

Teamwork is increasingly important to engineering success. In this course, students will learn how to foster the
development of effective of teams, using diversity management, integrative bargaining, career management, and other
methods.

END

MGT 06677:

Management Skills For Engineers

Prerequisites: Admission to the Master of Engineering Management Program

Technical skills are necessary but insufficient for success in engineering management. It is also necessary for enginerring
managers to be effective motivators and leaders. In this course, students will also learn optimal techniques of hiring and
rewarding engineers.

END

MGT 07500:

Prospective Analytics

Prerequisites: Admission to the MBA program

Students in this course will learn knowledge and methods for prescriptive analytics that include optimization,
decision-analysis, and simulation. These techniques and knowledge can be applied not only to improvement of operations
but also healthcare and service industries. Prescriptive analytics is essential in guiding managers and business professionals
to understand current and future situations and to derive concrete decision alternatives from the business data. Using a
fundamental and applied methods in prescriptive analytics, the course charts a course for moving forward on the horizon of
the immediate and long-term future.

END

MGT 07510:

Quality Analytics

This course builds a thorough understanding of how our processes and products can be continually improved through
organization-wide quality management. The course will cover customers, outputs, processes, inputs, stake and stock
holders, and decision making functions as they relate to enhancing the vitality of organizations to make them customer
focused. The focus is on developing and implementing "soft" and "hard" tools to deliver the "best net value" to customers.
In this course, students will investigate the aspects of forming organizational alliances and consensus thinking; deriving
functional synergies; using quality analytics such as Six Sigma, Design of Experiment, Control Charts, etc.; developing
customer orientation, facilitating teamwork, and getting a real-world perspective.

END

MGT 07550:

Operations Analytics

Prerequisites: MBA Foundation Courses

Operations is one of three pillars of business along with Marketing and Finance. This course will cover fundamentals of
Operations Analytics for various issues encountered in the real-world business operations to create values for customers and
organizations. The essential operations topics include forecasting strategies, inventory control and management, capacity
planning, project management, analyses of business processes, quality control and management, and other relevant and
contemporaneous topics. The objective is to equip our graduate students with the adequate knowledge of applying
operations analytics to dynamic and competitive business environments.

END

MGT 07600:

Predictive Analytics

Prerequisites: Admission to the MBA program or CAGS in Management

This course is designed to acquaint the graduate student with the advanced statistical forecasting techniques. Upon
completion of the course, the student should be able to identify a forecasting problem, gather data and use computerized
statistical packages to obtain solutions, analyze results, determine the validity and reliability of the model, and if necessary,
recommend alternative methods to solve the model. This course may not be offered annually.

END

MGT 07601:

Six Sigma

Prerequisites: MGT 07500

As an improvement methodology that reduces product waste or service failure rates to near perfection, Six Sigma utilizes a
disciplined, data-driven approach. Six Sigma practitioners use data to monitor, control, and improve operational
performance by eliminating and preventing defects in products and associated processes, including management, service
delivery, design, production and customer satisfaction. Lean Six Sigma helps eliminate not only product defects, but six
other forms of waste. This course will give a complete overview of the Six Sigma process and prepare students for its
management and methodology/

END

MGT 98242:

Legal Environment of Business

Students in this course examine the legal process and the legal environment within which business must operate, as well as
the interrelationship of government and business. Students develop an understanding of the methods by which legal
decisions are formulated as they affect both individual rights and business transactions.

END

BUS 01303:

Business Practicum

END

BUS 01401:

Issues in Business: Directed Research (WI)

Prerequisites: COMP 01.111, COMP 01112, BUS 01.101COLLEGE COMP 1 & 2 AND BUSINESS PERSPECTIVES OPEN ONLY
TO LIBERAL STUDIES: HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCEMAJORS

An upper-division course for students in Liberal Studies: Humanities & Social Sciences, Sequence B Perspectives of
Business, Issues in Business: Directed Research is a course that focuses on the current issues and trends in business as found
in the business media. The course is designed to allow students to explore areas of personal interest through the collection
of research and the presentation of such material in written and spoken formats.

END

MIS 02150:

Integrated Business Software Tools-RS

Students will expand their use of integrated software tools that include database management systems, spreadsheets, and
other business applications. They will apply these tools to actual business decision-making situations by means of case
studies and research projects.

END

MIS 02234:

Management Information Systems

Information systems are an integral part of all business activities and careers. This course is designed to introduce students
to contemporary information systems and demonstrate how these systems are used throughout organizations. This course
focuses on the key components of information systems - organizations, people, software, hardware, data, and
telecommunications - and how these components can be integrated and managed to create competitive advantage. Students
will gain hands-on experience with business software tools commonly applied to business data analysis and database
management. It is expected that students entering this class have completed College Algebra or its equivalent.

END

MIS 02338:

Design Of Database Systems

Prerequisites: Junior standing and enrollment in MIS Major or MIS Minor or CUGS Business Analytics or CUGS Information Systems

This course covers the principles, practices, design, and development of database management systems (DBMS). More
specifically, it focuses on logical modeling, physical data modeling, normalization, and database query languages. This course
provides students with hands-on experience of designing, creating, and querying relational databases using a relational
database management system (RDBMS) with emphasis on Structured Query Language (SQL) for data access and
manipulation.

END

MIS 02500:

Issues In Management Information Systems

Prerequisites: Admission to the MBA Program oradmission to the COGS in Business oradmission to the COGS in MIS

Information technology and systems are pervasive in business today and will become more so in the future. Therefore, this
course is designed to provide skills for managing this changing environment. The primary focus of the course is on the
management of technology. The management of technology and systems is not left solely to information systems
professionals; it is the responsibility of all managers.

END

MIS 02501:

Information Systems for Managers

Information systems and technology are pervasive in business today. This course is designed to improve students’
understanding of information systems and technology resources as well as learning how these critical resources should be
optimally deployed to achieve an organization’s strategic objectives. The primary focus of the course is the strategic and
managerial applications of technology, which is not left solely to technical specialists; it is the responsibility of all managers.

END

MIS 02510:

EXPERT SYS BUSINESS

END

MIS 02511:

ERP Systems For Management

Prerequisites: Admission to MBA, COGS in MIS, or CAGS in MIS programs

Students will learn the various key business processes, the role of enterprise resource planning systems (ERPs) in
integrating and supporting these processes, and the many challenges an organization faces during implementation and
management of such systems. There will be hands-on computer laboratory exercises where students will gain experience in
executing the key business steps and extracting meaningful information about the business processes using a well-regarded
ERP software solution.

END

MIS 02515:

Electronic Commerce

Prerequisites: Admission to the MBA Program or Admission to Certificate of Graduate Study (COGS) in MIS or Admission to
Certificate of Advanced Graduate Study (CAGS) in MIS

This course will introduce students to electronic business. It will cover such diverse issues as: e-commerce payment
mechanisms, encryption and authentication of data, web assurance, electronic data interchange, legal issues on the web, and
web marketing. There will also be a lab component that will provide students with exposure to and practice in web page
design and creation.

END

MIS 02522:

Systems Analysis And Design

Prerequisites: Admission to the MBA Program OR Admission to Certificate of Graduate Study (COGS) in MIS OR Admission to Certificate of Advanced Graduate Study (CAGS) in MIS

This course explains the methodology and techniques in analysis and design of computer information systems. The systems
analyst, the architect of information systems, is a liaison between user and programmer. The roles and responsibilities of the
systems analyst are emphasized at all stages of the systems development life cycle.

END

MIS 02525:

Project Management

Prerequisites: Admission to the MBA Program OR Admission to Certificate of Graduate Study (COGS) in MIS OR Admission to Certificate of Advanced Graduate Study (CAGS) in MIS

In this course, students will learn the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) as put forward by the
professional association, the Project Management Institute (PMI). Students will not only study the various phases and
documents of project management, they will also have experience creating each of the documents for a given project.

END

MIS 02526:

Project Management For Engineers

In this course, students will learn the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) as put forward by the
professional association, the Project Management Institute (PMI). Students will not only study the various phases and
documents of project management, they will also have experience creating each of the documents for a given project.

END

MIS 02528:

Business Application Design And Development

Prerequisites: Admission to MBA, COGS in MIS, or CAGS in MIS programs

Students will design, create, and maintain web applications that: dynamically display content from relational and
hierarchical databases, provide transaction processing from procurement to fulfillment, connect to and share internal data
with supply chain partners (extranet), afford ubiquitous access to internal data via secure channels (intranet). Students will
gain experience working with integrated software development tools, various programming languages, and many web-based
business standards.

END

MIS 02530:

Information Security for Managers

Prerequisites: Admission to graduate program in business or MS in Cybersecurity

This course is designed to provide students an overview of the strategies and skills required to develop and manage an
Information Security Program. The course focuses primarily on information security governance, program development and
management, incident management and risk management. Students will gain the skills needed to establish information
security strategies, build and manage an information security program, prepare for and respond to security incidents and
business continuity planning.

END

MIS 02538:

Database Design

Prerequisites: Admission to the MS in Bioinformatics, MBA, COGS in MIS, or CAGS in MIS programs

This course explores the fundamentals of designing a database. It emphasizes the relational model; however, the course
also explores the hierarchical and network models. Additionally, the course covers such topics as data insertion,
modification, and extraction using SQL. CASE tools and database management tools will be employed.

END

MIS 02540:

Data Warehousing & Business Intelligence

Prerequisites: MIS 02538

This course covers the concepts, principles, and tools of data warehousing technology as a component and function of
Business Intelligence. It explores how to solve business problems by using an organization’s data to gain new insights into its
operations. Additionally, it introduces the approaches, roles, and responsibilities associated with the design and
implementation of a data warehouse. This course leverages a portfolio of SQL Server tools for hands-on experience in
implementing a solution through assignments, lab exercises, and projects.

END

MIS 02599:

Special Topics In Management Information Systems

Prerequisites: Admission to the MBA Program or Admission to Certificate of Graduate Study (COGS) in MIS or Admission to Certificate of Advanced Graduate Study (CAGS) in MIS

Students will study advanced level topics in Management Information Systems. The exact topics to be covered will change
over time. Contact the MBA office or the Management and MIS Department for details.

END

MKT 09200:

Principles Of Marketing

Prerequisites: COMP 01105 or COMP 01111 and 12 Credits completed

This course provides an overview of the theory and practice of marketing within a corporate and societal context in a
dynamic environment. The major functions of marketing are covered from the perspective of management strategy seeking
competitive advantage.

END

MKT 09375:

Business Logistics

Prerequisites: MKT 09200 and Junior status orC918 Systems Engineering Concentration.

This course focuses on the logistics of physical distribution and supply chains. Topics include traffic routing, inventory
analysis and control, warehousing, location of production and storage facilities, and transportation.

END

MKT 09379:

International Marketing

Prerequisites: MKT 09200 with a minimum grade of C- and Junior status

Basic marketing concepts as they relate to foreign markets are analyzed in depth in this course. Two approaches are used:
the environmental approach introduces the setting in which international marketing takes place; and the managerial
approach incorporates marketing strategies of firms that choose to venture abroad.

END

MKT 09500:

Marketing Management

Prerequisites: MBA Foundation Courses

This course focuses on managing the marketing function in a dynamic, competitive environment in coordination with
other organizational functions to enhance the overall performance of an organization. Attention will be devoted to the
design of strategies for the achievement of competitive advantage in product/service offerings, pricing, promotion and
distribution. Students will build upon their existing knowledge base of marketing concepts and will develop or extend
competencies in analytical decision-making, ability to identify market opportunities, and ability to develop and evaluate
marketing plans.

END

MKT 09501:

Consumer Analysis

Students will conduct detailed analyses of consumer and/or business markets. After examining a range of conceptual
materials and research methodologies, they will apply these insights to the analysis of actual decision-making situations by
means of case studies and/or independent research projects.

END

MKT 09502:

Marketing Research

Contemporary marketing decisions are based on marketing research information. This course will help students develop a
managerial perspective on the use of marketing research information in making decisions, as well as specific research skills
and practical experiences that will enhance their career advancement. The skills covered in this course are applicable to
marketing problems encountered in both consumer and business-to-business markets. Students will experience a
"project-based learning" to apply marketing research tools and methods to identify and solve specific marketing problems.

END

MKT 09503:

Marketing Communication And Promotion

END

MKT 09510:

Foundations of Marketing

Prerequisites: Admission into the MBA or Business COGS program

For graduate students in the MBA or Business COGS programs, this course provides a foundational overview of the theory
and practice of marketing within a corporate and societal context in a dynamic environment. The major functions of
marketing are covered from the perspective of management strategy seeking competitive advantage by better serving
customers' needs more effectively and profitably than competitors.

END

MKT 09511:

Marketing Management Fundamentals

Focusing on the coordination of the marketing function with other organizational functions within an organization, the
course provides a broad overview of the management of the marketing function and the creation of marketing strategies
intended to create and maintain competitive advantage.

END

MKT 09575:

Introduction To Logistics And Supply Chain Management

Prerequisites: Admission to graduate programs

The course is a basic introduction to the field of logistics and supply chain management, including both defense logistics
and commercial supply chain management. The objective of the course is to provide students a solid awareness and
understanding of the processes and functions that comprise a supply chain. The course serves as the introductory course of a
three course specialization in Supply Chains and Logistical Systems in the MBA program. Moreover, students are required
to complete a term project to demonstrate their understanding of logistics and supply chain issues. Case analysis and
hands-on experience in this class will offer students the opportunity to broaden their horizon on the critical roles that the
supply chain plays in this globalized and interdependent world.

END

MKT 09599:

Special Topics In Marketing

Prerequisites: Admission to the MBA Program

Students will study advanced-level topics in Marketing. The exact topics to be covered will change over time. Contact teh
MBA office or the Marketing Department for details.

END

MKT 09600:

International Marketing

Students will examine all issues facing marketing managers in the light of the unique challenges posed by the
internationalization of the economy. The cultural, economic, political, and legal environment will be examined. Market
research in world markets, the planning and development of consumer and industrial products, promotion, pricing and
distribution will also be analyzed. This course may not be offered annually.

END

MKT 09605:

Competitive Advantage Through Supply Chain Management

Prerequisites: MGT 09575

This course is designed to educate students how to leverage supply chain management strategies to help a business improve
and maintain its competitiveness. This course covers the fundamentals of supply chain strategy, issues, and challenges.
Additional topics covered include logistics networks, forecasting, inventory management, supply contracts, strategic
alliances, supply chain integration and design, procurement and outsourcing, customer value and international issues. Case
studies are used in conjunction with a supply chain simulation to illustrate the concepts covered in lectures.

END

SCL 01380:

Global Supply Chain

Prerequisites: MKT 09375

The course is designed to assist students in developing the analytical skills necessary to manage the processes and functions
existent in modern global supply chains. Using the case method and recommended textbook, students will analyze realistic
situations and problems confronting supply chain managers in a global setting. They will also identify solutions and develop
implementation plans for their recommended solutions. Within this process, students will develop an acceptance,
understanding, and appreciation of the economic, political, and cultural differences that make up a global market. Cases for
analysis and discussion will include topics such as supply chain strategy, operations management, inventory management,
lean systems and six sigma quality issues, and sustainability supply chain management.

END

SCL 01620:

ANALYTICS FOR SUP CHAIN MGMT

Prerequisites: Admission to a Graduate Business Program

Given the increasing availability of data in today's business environment, integrating it into decision-making is critical for
increasing efficiency and profit generation. This course introduces students to the analytical techniques such as
optimization modeling, which enables them to make performance recommendations and investigate what-if scenarios in
business problems. This course focuses on several critical supply chain functions and teaches students how to effectively
understand and analyze data that may be available to them in the supply chain.

END

MATH 01122:

Precalculus Mathematics

Prerequisites: Old SAT score of 550+ or New SAT score of 570+ or ACT score of 24+ or Elem Algebra score of 77+ or AAF score of 263+
or "S" in MATH 01095

This course helps prepare students for Calculus I or Calculus T&A. The contents include: a brief review of intermediate
algebra, the structure of the real number system, elementary analytic geometry, and algebraic, exponential, logarithmic and
trigonometric functions (including their inverses and related functions). Graphs of functions and conic sections also are
studied. A graphing calculator is required. Students are expected to have completed an equivalent of Basic Algebra II.

END

MATH 01130:

Calculus I

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01122 or (MATH 01124 and MATH 01125) or (MATH 03125 and MATH 01125)or CLM score
of 60+ or AAF score of 276+ or Old SAT score of 600+ or New SAT score of 620+ or ACT 27+

Calculus is a subject about functions. This course deals primarily with the two most fundamental concepts in Calculus:
derivatives and definite integrals. It begins with a discussion of notions of the limit and continuity of a function. Then the
definition of a derivative is introduced, and techniques of computing derivatives are studied. Through applications to
analysis of functions, optimizations and problems in sciences, a student can appreciate the importance of the derivative. The
concept of a definite integral as a limit of approximating sums emerges naturally in the context of problems of areas. Hidden
links between the two concepts are formulated in the Fundamental Theorems of Calculus, which also provide a convenient
shortcut for computing definite integrals. A graphing calculator is required for this course, and so is the use of computer
software, such as Mathematica.

END

MATH 01131:

Calculus II

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01130

This course begins with applications of integration (such as volume of a solid of revolution work, arc length, area of a
surface of revolution, center of mass) and derivatives of inverse trigonometric functions. Integration by parts, partial
fractions and other more advanced integration techniques are introduced, along with a discussion of numerical integration,
improper integrals, indeterminate form, sequences and infinite series. A graphing calculator is required for this course, and
so is the use of computer software, such as Mathematica.

END

MATH 01205:

Technological Tools for Discovering Mathematics

Prerequisites: C- or better in each of CS 01104 and MATH 01131 and MATH 03150

This course will use mathematics-specific technologies to help students discover mathematics and to develop a better
understanding of new content. Throughout the course students will become aware of the broad range of
mathematics-specific technologies available to mathematicians, become proficient in the use of these, and pursue the
advantages, disadvantages, and limitations of such technologies. Students will solve problems and advance their
understanding of topics in the areas of pre-calculus, calculus, geometry and statistics.

END

MATH 01210:

Linear Algebra

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01131

This course includes: linear equations and matrices, vector spaces, linear dependence and independence, dimension and
basis of a vector space, linear transformations, inner product and cross product, orthogonality, eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
Use of graphing calculators is required and computers may be used at the option of the instructor. It is recommended that
MATH 03150 or MATH 03160 should be taken prior to this course.

END

MATH 01230:

Calculus III

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01131

This course includes: vectors, vector functions, velocity, acceleration, partial differentiation, directional derivatives,
multiple integration, and vector calculus. The student is expected to use computer software, such as Mathematica, in
addition to the graphing calculator.

END

MATH 01231:

Ordinary Differential Equations

Prerequisites: C- or better in both MATH 01210 and MATH 01230

Applications of ordinary differential equations and their methods of solution form the major part of this course. It also
includes the solution of nth order equations, particularly of first and higher degree linear differential equations, and series
and Laplace Transform solutions. Students might be asked to use computers and/or graphics calculators as an aid in solving
equations.

END

MATH 01310:

College Geometry

Prerequisites: C- or better in each of PHIL 09130 and MATH 01210 and MATH 01230 and MATH 03150

This geometry course will use both synthetic and analytic approaches to study advanced concepts in Euclidean geometry,
to introduce non-Euclidean geometry, to explore the basics of Transformational geometry and Higher Dimensional
geometry, and to trace the historical development of geometry. Computer use will be emphasized throughout the course.

END

MATH 01330:

Introduction to Real Analysis I

Prerequisites: C- or better in both MATH 01230 and MATH 03150

This course prepares students for more advanced courses in analysis as well as introducing rigorous mathematical thought
processes. Topics included are sets, functions, the real number system, sequences, limits, continuity and derivatives.

END

MATH 01331:

Introduction to Real Analysis II

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01330

This course is a continuation of Introduction to Real Analysis I. The purpose is to extend student's understanding of basic
analysis and the calculus. Topics included are: the mean-value theorem, existence of the Riemann integral,
Riemann-Stieltjes integration, infinite series, convergence tests and Fourier series.

END

MATH 01332:

Numerical Analysis

Prerequisites: C- or better in each of (CS 01104 or CS 04103 or CS 04113) and MATH 01131 and (MATH 01210 or MATH 01235)

This course includes: elements of error analysis, real roots of an equation, polynomial approximation by finite difference
and least square methods, interpolation, quadrature, numerical solution of ordinary differential equations, and numerical
solutions of systems of linear equations. The student should expect to program a computer in addition to using a graphing
calculator.

END

MATH 01340:

Modern Algebra I

Prerequisites: C- or better in each of MATH 03150 and MATH 01210 and PHIL 09130

This course includes: the natural numbers, integers, rationals, and reals as mathematical systems, and the introductory
theory of groups, rings, integral domains, and fields. Also included are homomorphisms and isomorphisms, subgroups,
kernels, rings and ideals and polynomial rings. At the option of the instructor, computer use can be required.

END

MATH 01341:

Modern Algebra II

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01340

This course extends the study begun in Modern Algebra I to a more detailed investigation of abstract algebraic structures.
Included are Sylow theorems, rings and ideals, polynomial rings, ring and field extension and Galois theory.

END

MATH 01352:

Theory of Numbers

Prerequisites: C- or better in both MATH 01210 and MATH 03150, or C- or better in both MATH 01210 and MATH 03160

This course includes divisibility properties of integers, theory of congruence, Diophantine Analysis, congruences of higher
degree, quadratic residues and famous problems of number theory.

END

MATH 01354:

Introduction to Topology

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01330

This course covers the properties of general topological spaces, separation, compactness, connectedness and the
Heine-Borel and Bolzano-Weierstrass theorems.

END

MATH 01386:

Introduction to Partial Differential Equations

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01231 and MATH 01210) or MATH 01235

This course is a study of partial differential equations and their applications. Topics include the derivation of the wave
equation, Laplace's equation and the heat equation, Fourier series and integrals, boundary value problems, Bessel functions
and Legendre Polynomials.

END

MATH 01410:

History of Mathematics

Prerequisites: C- or better in two 300-level (or higher) Math major courses

This course includes a survey of the development of mathematical ideas from early times up to present day college
mathematics. Emphasis is on historical mathematical problems and their solution. Readings and reports on selected topics
are required.

END

MATH 01421:

Mathematics Field Experience

Prerequisites: MATH 01131 and STAT 02360 and permission of instructor

Students accept assigned projects in a professional environment. These projects normally involve applied mathematics or
statistics. Students are expected to work at least 150 hours during the semester for which they receive credit. Written
reports are required.

END

MATH 01430:

Introduction to Complex Analysis

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01330

This course includes properties of complex numbers and their conjugates, functions of a complex variable, limits,
continuity and derivatives for complex functions. Also included are: Integration and the Cauchy integral theorems, uniform
convergence, Taylor's and Laurent's series and conformal mapping.

END

MATH 01498:

Math Seminar (WI)

Prerequisites: Senior standing and C- or better in STAT 02320 and MATH 01340 and MATH 01231 and MATH 01330 or (STAT 02360 and STAT 02361)

This course is designed to integrate students' knowledge of mathematics and to further develop their problem solving
abilities. The course content includes problem-solving techniques, a review of the literature of mathematics, solving
problems drawn from a variety of current resources, and study of techniques of proof and issues in the philosophy of
mathematics and its foundation. Additionally, each student is required to write and to present orally, a research report on a
mathematical topic.

END

MATH 01500:

Foundations Of Mathematics

Strategies and tools for problem solving, including computer use, will be applied to specific problems from number theory,
geometry, analytic geometry, algebra, discrete mathematics, logic, and calculus.

END

MATH 01502:

Linear Algebra and Matrix Theory

This course includes linear systems, linear dependence and independence, linear transformation theory, multilinear forms,
matrices, determinants, inner product spaces.

END

MATH 01503:

Number Theory

This course includes divisibility properties of integers, mathematical induction, modular congruence, linear congruences
and diophantine analysis, congruences of higher degree, quadratic residues, famous problems of number theory.

END

MATH 01504:

Introduction To Mathematical Logic

This course includes intuitive set theory, relations and functions, sentential calculus, predicate calculus, mathematical
systems, axiomatic theories.

END

MATH 01505:

Probability and Mathematical Statistics I

This course is an introduction to the theory and application of probability and mathematical statistics. After a brief
introduction to the concepts of descriptive and inferential statistics, the emphasis is on probability theory and its
applications. Topics covered include introduction to probability theory, transformations and expectations, common
families of discrete and continuous distributions, multivariate distributions and properties of a random sample.

END

MATH 01506:

Probability and Mathematical Statistics II

Prerequisites: MATH 01505

This course provides a solid foundation in statistical inference. Knowledge of probability theory will be assumed. Topics
include principles of data reduction, methods of finding tests, point estimators,and testing of statistical hypotheses. Finally,
computer simulations will be used to corroborate many of the important concepts.

END

MATH 01507:

Differential Geometry

This course explores the application of calculus towards the study of higher-dimensional surfaces and their geometry.
Topics include geodesics, tangent space, directional derivative, Riemannian metrics, isometrics, Gaussian curvature, first
and second fundamental forms, Gauss-Bonnet Theorem, minimal surfaces, differential manifolds, connections, and
Riemannian curvature tensors. Special topics (at the discretion of the instructor) may include Lie groups, symmetric spaces,
general relativity, cohomology, and complex geometry. Students will be required to use a computer algebra system to gain
geometric intuition.

END

MATH 01510:

Real Analysis I

The theoretical treatment of the foundations of calculus covering the real and complex number systems, elementary set
theory, number sequences and series, topological treatment of the real line, continuity and differentiation.

END

MATH 01511:

Real Analysis II

The continuation of Real Analysis I covering Riemann-Stieltjes integration, sequences and series of function, functions of
several variables, elements of measure theory and Lebesgue integration.

END

MATH 01512:

Complex Analysis I

The elementary theory of the functions of a complex variable covering operations with complex numbers, graphing on the
Argand-Gauss-Wessel plane, analytic functions, complex integration. Cauchy's theorem and its applications, poles and
residues, power series and conformal mapping are studied.

END

MATH 01513:

Complex Analysis II

The continuation of Complex Analysis I covering Riemann-Stieltjes integration, meromorphic functions, conformal
mappings, analytic continuation, fractional linear transformations and periodic functions.

END

MATH 01515:

Engineering Applications Of Analysis

This course will cover various techniques for solving linear and nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs) arising from
physical and engineering applications; this includes both analytical and numerical methods. More specifically, students will
learn the method of separation of variables for solving multi-dimensional problems, Fourier/Laplace transforms for solving
infinite-domain problems, numerical methods (finite-difference, finite-element, Monte-Carlo), Green's functions, method
of characteristics, and inverse scattering. Basic applications include a vibrating membrane (wave equation), heat flow along a
metal plate (heat equation), steady-state fluid flow (Laplace's equation), traffic flow (shock waves), and solitary waves
(solitons). Students will be required to use a computer algebra system, e.g. Mathematica, to solve problems.

END

MATH 01520:

Topics In Applied Mathematics

This course provides an overview of the mathematical modeling process and includes applications to optimization,
dynamical systems, and Stochastic processes. Models of specific real world systems will be developed and studied using
analytical and numerical methods.

END

MATH 01521:

Nonlinear Differential Equations

This course examines analytic and computer methods for the solution of ordinary differential equations which are of
interest in applications. Topics are selected from differential equations in the phase plane, geometrical and computational
aspects of the phase plane, averaging methods, perturbation methods, stability, Liapunov methods, existence of periodic
solutions, bifurcations and chaos. Applications are also included that are of use in science and engineering.

END

MATH 01522:

History Of Mathematics

Topics will include: Babylonian, Egyptian and Greek mathematics. Attention will be given to the development of
trigonometry, algebra, analytic geometry and the calculus.

END

MATH 01523:

Selected Topics In Mathematics

This course provides students with the opportunity to explore current issues in mathematics. The course will have a
changing focus that will permit faculty to offer specialized seminars focused on new developments in the field, issues of
significance, areas of faculty research, or in response to students' requests. Students may take this course for credit more
than once (limit: 9 s.h.), as long as the focus of the course is different each time the student enrolls.

END

MATH 01524:

Abstract Algebra I

This introduction of abstract algebra will include the construction of number systems, theory of groups, rings, integral
domains and fields.

END

MATH 01525:

Modern Geometry

This course provides an overview of the field of geometry by studying selected geometries in depth, both Euclidian and
non-Euclidian. Indicative exploration and the axiomatic method, as well as synthetic and algebraic approaches to problems,
are examined. Unless recommended by the adviser, this course should not be chosen if a similar course has been part of the
student's undergraduate program.

END

MATH 01526:

Point Set Topology

An introduction to one of the major branches of modern mathematics covering axiomatic development of topological
spaces and metric spaces, and the concepts of convergence, continuity, separation, compactness and connectedness.

END

MATH 01527:

Abstract Algebra II

The continuation of Abstract Algebra I covering advanced material from group theory, ring theory and field theory.

END

MATH 01528:

Mathematical Modeling & Algebraic Reasoning

Students in this course will learn about polynomial, rational, and exponential functions by building and analyzing
mathematical models for a variety of situations. Using algebraic representations, problem solving, using technology,
connecting abstract algebra with middle grades mathematics, and fluency with algebraic procedures will be stressed.

END

MATH 01529:

Numerical Analysis

This course examines the theoretical foundations of numerical methods and studies in detail existing numerical methods
for solving many standard mathematical problems in analysis and algebra. Error analysis will be developed for all methods.
Some recent advances in the theory of chaos and nonlinear dynamics will also be presented.

END

MATH 01533:

Graduate Seminar In Mathematics

Students will be introduced to mathematics not found in textbooks. They will learn how to read journal articles and analyze
them. An emphasis will be placed on communication skills, both oral and written. Students will be required to give both oral
and written analysis of their readings.

END

MATH 01550:

Independent Study

This course is designed for an individual who wishes to study a mathematical subject or topic not included in the listed
offerings of the program. The student undertakes independent study under the supervision of a mathematics staff member.
Registration by permission of the department chairman and the supervising department member.

END

MATH 01552:

HISTORY OF MATH

END

MATH 01561:

School Mathematics From An Advanced Standpoint

This course is to develop a deeper understanding of mathematics and a new appreciation of its beauty, its logical structure
and its applicability. The course will take into account not only the many interconnections among school mathematics
topics but also their relationship to higher mathematics.

END

MATH 01603:

Analytic Number Theory

Prerequisites: MATH 01503, MATH 01512

This course covers introductory topics in analytic number theory. Topics include theory of congruence, multiplicative
functions, distribution of prime and the Prime Number Theorem, subgroups of the modular group and their fundamental
domains, modular forms and their Fourier series expansions.

END

MATH 03125:

Calculus: Techniques and Applications

Prerequisites: C- or better in MATH 01122 or MATH 01123 or MATH 01124 or CLM score of 60+ or AAF score of 276+ or Old SAT
score of 600+ or New SAT score of 620+ or ACT 27+

This course introduces students to the fundamental concepts and techniques of differential and integral calculus. Emphasis
is placed on practical and informative applications of limits, derivatives and integrals in today’s world, with those in business
highlighted. A graphics calculator is required. Students are expected to have completed an equivalent of the course of
College Algebra.

END

MATH 03150:

Discrete Mathematics

Prerequisites: Old SAT score of 550+ or New SAT score of 570+ or ACT score of 24+ or Elem Algebra score of 77+ or QAS score of 255+
or "S" in MATH 01095

This course provides a survey of discrete mathematics topics appropriate as an introduction for students of mathematics
and computer science. Topics included are logic, sets, relations, functions, recursion, combinatorics, graphs, and modular
arithmetic. Emphasis is place on exploration and computation in these areas.

END

MATH 03160:

Discrete Structures

Prerequisites: Old SAT score of 550+ or New SAT score of 570+ or ACT score of 24+ or Elem Algebra score of 77+ or QAS score of 255+ or "S" in MATH 01095

This course covers mathematical topics essential for work in computer science. This material includes number bases,
mathematical induction, sets, relations, functions, congruence, recursion, combinatorics, graphs, trees, logic, Boolean
algebras, and proof techniques. While this is a course in mathematics, many of the examples and applications will be taken
from computer science. The instructor may require use of a graphing calculator and/or computer. This course covers much
of the same material as Discrete Mathematics (MATH03.150), but with a computer science focus. In no case will a student
be allowed to receive credit for both courses. Both courses will be treated as equivalent for the purposes of satisfying
prerequisites and course requirements.

END

MATH 03400:

Applications of Mathematics

Prerequisites: C- or better in each of MATH 01210, MATH 01230, and MATH 01231

This course may include examples of mathematical models applied to the various fields of the biological, physical and social
sciences. The process of building a mathematical model to describe a real world system will be demonstrated. Emphasis will
be placed on the value of mathematical models for solving problems and obtaining new results. Computers and graphing
calculators will be used.

END

MATH 03411:

Deterministic Models in Operations Research

Prerequisites: C- or better in (MATH 01230 or MATH 01141) and C- or better in (MATH 01210 or MATH 01235)

This course is an introduction to mathematical modeling, analysis, and solution procedures applicable to decision-making
problems in deterministic environment. Methodologies covered include the simplex and interior point methods of solving
linear programming models, inventory theory, assignment and transportation problems, dynamic programming and
sensitivity analysis. Solutions will be obtained using theoretical methods and software packages.

END

MATH 03412:

Stochastic Models in Operations Research

Prerequisites: C- or better in each of STAT 02360 and MATH 03411, or C- or better in each of STAT 02360 and (MATH 01230 or
MATH 01141) and (MATH 01210 or MATH 01235)

This course is an introduction to mathematical modeling, analysis, and solution procedures applicable to decision-making
problems in an uncertain (stochastic) environment. Methodologies covered include dynamic programming, Markov chains,
queuing theory, decision trees, system reliability and inventory theory. Solutions will be obtained using theoretical methods
and software packages.

END

MATH 03501:

Mathematical Modeling for Biological Systems

Prerequisites: MATH 01210 or MATH 01231 or permission of instructor

This course introduces students to modeling biological systems using ordinary differential equations. It focuses on the
modeling process including the construction, analysis, and interpretation of mathematical models. It introduces new
techniques for studying the solutions to these mathematical models and develops precedures for making the models more
realistic.

END

MATH 03511:

Operations Research I

This course is an introduction to mathematical modeling, analysis, and solution procedures applicable to decision-making
problems in deterministic environment. Methodologies covered include the simplex and interior point methods of solving
linear programming models, project planning, network optimization, assignment and transportation problems, dynamic
programming and game theory. Solutions will be obtained using theoretical methods and software packages.

END

MATH 03512:

Operations Research II

This course is an introduction to mathematical modeling, analysis, and solution procedures applicable to decision-making
problems in an uncertain (stochastic) environment. Methodologies covered include dynamic programming, simulation,
Markov chains, queuing theory, decision analysis, dynamic programming, system reliability and inventory theory. Solutions
will be obtained using theoretical methods and software packages.

END

MATH 03525:

Partial Differential Equations in Biomathematics

Prerequisites: MATH 01231 or permission of instructor.

This course covers topics in partial differential equations as it applies to biomathematics. These include second order
linear and nonlinear partial differential equations, diffusion and conservation laws, waves and pattern formation,
Chemotaxis and other forms of cell and organism movement. Computer software, such as Mathematica, will be used.

END

MATH 03550:

Topics In Discrete Mathematics

This course provides an advanced approach to topics in discrete mathematics for persons with substantial backgrounds in
traditional mathematics. Selected topics are explored in depth and related to concepts from other areas of mathematics.
Topics normally included are logic, combinatorics, number systems, data structures and representations, Boolean algebra,
induction, graphs and trees.

END

MATH 03600:

Topics In Elementary Mathematics

This course is designed to improve the understanding and attitudes of practicing elementary teachers (K-8). Specific topics
to be addressed include quantitative reasoning, spatial reasoning, inductive and deductive reasoning, mathematical systems,
and communication in mathematics. Students are expected to engage in some independent work.

END

MATH 03610:

Applied Statistical Epidemiology

Prerequisites: MATH 01505, MATH 01502 AND CS 01104 or equivalent or Permission of Instructor

This course introduces the basic concepts of epidemiology and focuses on analyzing epidemiological data using a statistical
programming language such as R, one of the most efficient programming languages for statistical computing and graphics.
This course will lay the ground work to successfully design, conduct, analyze and interpret findings from epidemiological
studies using the appropriate statistical methods.

END

MATH 03611:

Special Topics in Biomathematics

This course covers in depth a wide-range of advanced topics in biomathematics inspired by applications of mathematics in
biology and health sciences problems. The course will offer students the opportunity to learn modern emerging cutting-edge
research approaches not covered by other courses.

END

MATH 03612:

Masters Thesis

This course is a graduate Master’s thesis course and will serve as capstone experience. It provides students with hands-on
research experience in a topic of interest in mathematics, applied mathematics or statistics under the supervision of a faculty
from the Department of Mathematics. Upon completion of the research project, the results will be presented to a Master’s
thesis committee for approval.

END

STAT 02100:

Elementary Statistics

This course gives a basic introduction to the fundamental concepts and methods of statistics. Its topics include: basic
measures of central tendency and variability, graphical displays, elementary design of experiments, descriptive simple linear
regression, elementary probability, the normal and t-distributions, confidence intervals and hypothesis testing. Use of a
statistical calculator, graphing calculator or software package is required. Note: many majors require a different introductory
statistics course; students should check their major requirements before signing up for this course.

END

STAT 02260:

Statistics I

Students learn to use various graphical displays and measures of location and variability to describe data. The course
considers elementary probability and sampling distributions, and uses the normal and t-distributions in estimation and
hypotheses testing. It includes descriptive techniques for simple linear regression and correlation. Use of a graphing
calculator is required; computer software may be used. Students are expected to have completed an equivalent of College
Algebra.

END

STAT 02280:

Biometry

Prerequisites: MATH 01130 and (BIOL 01106 or BIOL 01202 or MCB 01101)

This laboratory course considers elementary data analysis, probability and sampling distributions. It uses the normal and
t-distributions to introduce estimation and hypotheses testing. It includes descriptive techniques and inference for simple
linear regression and correlation. Analyses of variance, nonparametric tests and chi-square tests are covered in this course.
Emphasis is placed on experimentation and the application of statistical methods to the biological sciences. Computer
software is used regularly in data manipulation, statistical analyses, and formal presentation of results.

END

STAT 02290:

Probability and Statistical Inference for Computing Systems

Prerequisites: C- or better in each of (MATH 03150 or MATH 03160) and MATH 01131 and (CS 04113 or CS 01104 or CS 04103)

This laboratory course considers descriptive techniques for presenting and summarizing data, techniques in probability,
discrete and continuous random variables, estimation and hypothesis testing. Emphasis is placed on concepts and
simulation, regularly using computer software for data manipulation and presentation, function manipulation and
presentation, simulation, and statistical analyses. Examples will be drawn from the field of Computer Science.

END

STAT 02360:

Probability and Random Variables

Prerequisites: C- or better in both of MATH 03150 and (MATH 01230 or MATH 01141)

This course is an introduction to the theory and application of probability and random variables, with a short introduction
to mathematical statistics, as the post-calculus level. Topics covered include sample spaces, random variables, discrete and
continuous probability distributions, mathematical expectation, and multivariate distributions. At the end of the course the
concept of estimation, from mathematical statistics, will be introduced. A few of the concepts of descriptive statistics will
be introduced as needed. Use of a graphing calculator is required.

END

STAT 02361:

Mathematical Statistics

Prerequisites: C- or better in STAT 02360

A continuation of STAT 02.360, the course emphasizes the theory of inferential statistics and its applications. The Central
Limit Theorem is more fully developed as are the concepts of estimation and hypothesis testing. The properties of
estimators are covered and tests using normal, t, chi-square, and F distributions are studied. Nonparametric methods,
regression, and correlation are also covered. Use of a graphing calculator is required.

END

STAT 02371:

Design of Experiments: Analysis of Variance

Prerequisites: (MATH 01210 and MATH 01235) and (STAT 02260 or STAT 02280 or STAT 02284 or STAT 02286 or STAT 02290 or STAT 02320 or STAT 02361)

Students will gain an understanding of the major theoretical and practical concepts in the design of experiments using the
statistical technique called the analysis of variance (ANOVA). A brief discussion of the concept of power, and the minimum
number of experimental trials to achieve that power, will be used as this motivation for careful design. Students will be
introduced to several aspects of the design of experiments beyond one- and two-way ANOVA, such as blocking, factorial
designs, fractional designs, and random factors.

END

STAT 02509:

Probability and Statistics for Data Science

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the MS in Data Science or permission of the program coordinator

This course serves as an introduction to mathematical statistics concepts and methods essential for multivariate statistical
analysis. Students will learn core ideas in probability theory and statistical methods including properties of probability
distributions, expectation and variance of random variables, conditional probability and independence, discrete bivariate
distributions, correlation, covariance, sampling distributions, point estimation, confidence intervals, hypothesis testing and
regression analysis.

END

STAT 02510:

Introduction to Statistical Data Analysis

Prerequisites: Probability & Random Variables (STAT 02.360) or equivalent, and Linear Algebra (MATH 01.210) or equivalent.

This course examines the principles behind statistical data analysis, and introduces students to major areas of statistical
data analysis needed by a practicing biomathematician. Using simulation, students will use bootstrapping to develop the
mechanics of confidence intervals, use randomization to develop the mechanics of hypthesis tests, and learn the types of
conclusions that can justifiably be made from a study. They will also be introduced to models of analyzing data that is
categorical, numerical, and a combination of both, through the study of contingency tables, linear regression, and the
analysis of variance. They will use at lease one statistical software package.

END

STAT 02511:

Statistical Computing

Prerequisites: STAT 02510

This is an introductory course in programming-based statistical software packages, such as SAS, R, Matlab, etc. Students
will learn the core of ideas of programming such as objects, data structures, looping, and functions. Students will also learn
how to read data from different types of files, format them appropriately and use them to perform basic statistical analyses,
such as graphing and computing numerical summaries, or more advanced statistical analyses, such as one and two sample
T-tests, Chi-square for comparisons of proportions, regression, non-parametric analyses, bootstrapping, and simulations.

END

STAT 02513:

Applied Stochastic Processes

Prerequisites: STAT 02360 and MATH 01210 or ECE 09433 or permission of instructor.

This course introduces the concept of a sequence of random events known as a stochastic process, as well as the
mathematical methods used to model variety of types of stochastic processes and analyze their short and long-term
behavior. A broad spectrum of examples from bilogy, health, and medicine will be included throughout the course. Topics
include the basic classifications of stochastic processes, Markov chains, Poisson processes, continuous-time Markov chains,
renewal processes, and branching processes. Statistical and computer algebra system software will be used when relevant.

END

STAT 02514:

Decision Analysis

Prerequisites: STAT 02510 or permission from instructor

This course examines the basic principles for performing a decision analysis, including those needed for decision making in
areas such as medicine, the environment, and public health. Topics include the components of a decision and a model of a
decision, the use of probability as a model for reasoning with uncertainty, subjective probability, utility theory, Bayesian
inferential methods, sensitivity analysis, Monte Carlo simulation, and multi-objective decision problems. Professional
decision analysis software will be used throughout the course.

END

STAT 02515:

Applied Multivariate Data Analysis

Prerequisites: Graduate standing in M.S. in Data Analytics or (MATH 01131 and MATH 01210) and (STAT 02360 and STAT
02260 or STAT 02290) or permission of the instructor.

This course examines the principles behind statistical data analysis for multivariate data, and introduces the students to
major areas of multivariate I data analysis. Topics include multiple and logistic regression, principal component analysis,
factor analysis, cluster analysis, MANOVA, multidimensional scaling, discriminant analysis and canonical correlation. The
students will use at least one statistical software package.

END

STAT 02525:

Design and Analysis of Experiments

Prerequisites: Graduate standing and an introductory statistics course at at-least the 200 level, or permission of the instructor.

This is a graduate level course that investigates fundamental topics in experimentation as well as design methods. The
course also introduces the analysis associated with various experiments. Examples and case studies based on real-world
events will be used to illustrate course concepts. Students will be required to complete and end-to-end project that will
include an experiment's design, data collection and analysis.

END

STAT 02530:

Applied Survival Analysis

Prerequisites: STAT 02510

This course provides an introduction to the methods used for the analysis of time-to-event data, such as time to first
recurrence of a tumor after initial treatment (i.e. length of remission) and time to failure in mechanical systems. The topics
covered include types of censoring and truncation, common nonparametric (i.e., Kaplan-Meier estimator), parametric, and
semi-parametric (i.e. Cox model) approaches, model checking methods, reliability topics (homogeneous Poisson process),
sample size, and power estimation. While the theoretical basis for the methodology will be discussed, the primary focus of
the course will be on model selection, data analysis, and interpretation of results. Extensive use of statistical software will be
incorporated into the course.

END

STAT 02585:

Introduction to Bayesian Statistical Methods

Prerequisites: STAT 02510

This course provides an introduction to statistics from a Bayesian perspective in which one's inferences about parameters
or hypotheses are updated as evidence accumulates. The course will focus on Bayesian methods for inference and how these
methods compare with commonly-taught Frequentist approach. Benefits of the Bayesian approach will also be discussed.
Methods learned will be applied in the analyses of various practical problems using a statistical programming language such
as R or SAS.

END

ENGR 01512:

Principles Of Nanotechnology

Prerequisites: (PHYS 02200 or PHYS 00220) and (PHYS 02201 or PHYS 00222) and CHEM 06100

This course explores the science and engineering at the nanometer scales. Topics include fundamentals of nanotechnology;
types and properties of nanomaterials; methods of fabrication; how these materials are characterized and the potential
applications.

END

ME 10501:

Computer Integrated Manufacturing and Automation

The course covers the basic aspects of computer integrated manufacturing and automation systems. Hard and flexible
automation concepts are introduced. Various automation strategies are presented. Coding and classification ideas of group
technology are related to computer aided process planning. Topics of numerical control, industrial robotics, and artificial
intelligence are discussed.

END

ME 10505:

Special Topics in Mechanical Engineering

The topics will be announced in the course schedule.

END

ME 10506:

Computational Materials Science

END

ME 10511:

Combustion

This course presents the concepts of chemically reacting systems (flames) along with many practical applications. Topics
include chemical equilibrium, chemical kinetics, premixed laminar flames, detonations, diffusion flames and environmental
issues. The course uses chemically reacting flow software for combustion modeling.

END

ME 10512:

Rocket Propulsion

Principles of rocket propulsion theory are presented along with practical applications of rocket propulsion design.
Theoretical topics include performance analysis of ideal rocket engines, departure from ideal performance and detailed
thermochemical propellant calculations. Practical design issues are addressed for both liquid propellant engines and solid
rocket motors. The course also includes an introduction to electric propulsion.

END

ME 10513:

Principles in Advanced Heat and Mass Transfer

Prerequisites: CHE 06311 or ME 10322

The topics covered in this course extend and complement the Thermal-Fluid Sciences II course. While Thermal-Fluid
Sciences II provides an overview and introduction to the engineering fundamentals of heat transfer, Principles of Advanced
Heat and Mass Transfer will provide a deeper knowledge of heat transfer principles, and will allow more rigorous and
open-ended problems to be examined. The course will include two additional topics, radiation and mass transfer. Students
successfully completing this course will be able to solve a wider range of heat and mass transfer problems encountered in
industry.

END

ME 10514:

Energy Conversion Systems

This course will introduce energy conversion technologies for the generation of electrical power. Topics will include a
review of power cycles, steam and gas cycles, generation of thermal power, combustion and fuels, steam power plant design
considerations, gas turbine power plant operation and design considerations, combined cells, and environmental
considerations in power generation. A course project will be required on an advanced topic of mutual interest between the
student and instructor.

END

ME 10521:

Gas Dynamics

This course emphasizes application of the conservation equations of mass, momentum and energy to solve problems in
one-dimensional and two-dimensional compressible flow including one-dimensional isentropic flow, flow with area change,
adiabatic flow with friction, normal shock waves and flow with heat addition. The method of characteristics is introduced to
solve two-dimensional compressible flow problems. Numerical techniques are presented and a numerical analysis project is
completed on one-dimensional, unsteady flow.

END

ME 10522:

Computational Fluid Dynamics

This course introduces computational fluid dynamics (CFD) using a primarily software-based approach. Following an
overview of the key steps involved with CFD, the class reviews the fundamental mathematics that govern fluid dynamics. An
overview of governing equation discretization techniques is presented with assignments that involve building custom
algorithms to solve simplified CFD problems. CFD essentials such as consistency, stability and convergence are covered
in-depth. Several modeling labs are used to build software skill and explore internal and external flows that are largely
incompressible and viscous. The final weeks of this class are dedicated to a final project on a student-selected topic. The
student will complete an independent laboratory exercise of project.

END

ME 10530:

Reliability Engineering

This course introduces the background, important topics, and practical aspect of reliability engineering. It covers critical
concepts such as reliability mathematics, life data analysis, probability plotting, reliability prediction, reliability modeling,
design for reliability, design of experiments, and analysis of variance. The course also examines how reliability engineering
can be used in applications, especially in mechanical systems.

END

ME 10532:

Quality & Reliability in Engineering

This course introduces concepts of quality and reliability for application in design and manufacture. Basic aspects of
dimensioning, tolerancing, and fits are introduced through application of the normal distribution and its variations.
Geometric tolerances of form, orientation, position and runout are presented. Aspects of process capability and statistical
process control are discussed. Concepts of failure and reliability are presented.

END

ME 10533:

Renewable Energy: Photovoltaics and Energy Harvesting

This course covers concepts and technologies related to renewable energy. The emphasis will be placed upon photovoltaics
and energy harvesting. Topics include energy economy, renewable energy concepts and resources, photovoltaics,
semiconductors, p-n junctions, solar cells using crystal materials, thin films, and organic materials, and energy harvesting
using piezoelectric and thermoelectric devices. Course topics will be reinforced by in-depth discussion on research progress
in renewable energy. Students will complete a term paper with the focus on an advanced topic in renewable energy.

END

ME 10535:

Wind Energy

This course covers an overview of the wind energy system and its application for power generation. Aerodynamics of wind
turbine blades, prediction of available wind power, wind turbine siting, and generation of electrical power are discussed.
Analysis of environmental impacts and offshore wind farms are introduced.

END

ME 10540:

Advanced Manufacturing

This course will provide students with knowledge of modern manufacturing processes, how design is optimized for
manufacture, and information on future directions of manufacturing, such as additive (3D printing) manufacturing
techniques and the use of digital data across the product life cycle. The course will also discuss the taxonomy of
manufacturing processes and provide an examination of current state of the art manufacturing with an emphasis on trends
and directions in manufacturing, the relationship of digital data to design and production, and the impact of supply chain on
production decisions.

END

ME 10541:

Advanced Mechanism Design

This course presents an in-depth coverage of the design of mechanisms using matrix methods as the platform to model,
synthesize, analyze and simulate mechanisms. It covers advanced design techniques that include type synthesis, numerical
optimization techniques as applied to mechanism design. It also covers branch defects and circuit defects that occur during
mechanism synthesis and modeling and simulation of mechanical systems. Students will perform analysis and simulation
using appropriate mechanism design software.

END

ME 10542:

Advanced Mechatronics

This course introduces the students to the design and development of mechatronic systems. It introduces the students to
the multidisciplinary nature of mechatronic products, and teaches them to design and develop such products. Students will
learn about mechatronic design philosophy, mechatronic system modeling, sensors, actuators, microprocessors and their
interfaces. The course project will involve the design of a real-world mechatronic system. A final project will be required.

END

ME 10543:

Advanced Design for X

This course introduces students to the design of systems from the Design for X perspective. The Design for X course
teaches how to deal with conflicting and ever-increasing constraints upon the design process. It teaches students to adopt a
systematic design approach that addresses issues related to manufacture, assembly, environment, reliability and other
factors.

END

ME 10544:

Automotive Engineering: Elements of Internal Combustion Engines

END

ME 10550:

Advanced Solid Mechanics

END

ME 10551:

Mechanics of Continuous Media

Students will engage the three-tiered framework used to interrogate problems involving bodies of continuous media. This
begins with derivation of the governing equations from the conservation of mass, momentum, and energy followed by the
application of constitutive models, such as Hooke's law, that govern the behavior of particular materials, and concludes with
the solution of boundary value problems. In addition to the study of classical problems and their solutions, students will be
required to program numerical algorithms for the solution of problems that can not be solved in closed form. Kinetic and
kinematic constraints, such as material frame indifference, compatibility, and objectivity, will be addressed. The material
covered will include both cylindrical and Cartesian coordinate frames.

END

ME 10552:

Structural Acoustics

Control of noise is an important part of engineering practice in many industries today. Vital to effective noise control is an
understanding of wave behavior in structures. This course will teach engineers the fundamentals of the generation of noise
in structures, with an emphasis on the phenomena of mechanical resonance and modal behavior. Topics covered include
vibration of strings, bars, beams and plates. An introduction to simple acoustic sources will be given.

END

ME 10553:

Analytical Dynamics

This course is an advanced introduction to three-dimensional motion of particles and rigid bodies. Students study modern
analytical rigid body dynamics equation formulation and computational solution techniques applied to mechanical systems
and multibody systems. Students will formulate Newton/Euler and Lagrangian equations for applications to engineering
systems, Hamiltonians principle, study kinematics of motion generalized coordinates and speeds, analytical and
computational determination of inertia properties, generalized forces, holonomic and nonholonomic constraints,
computational simulation.

END

ME 10554:

Elastic Stability of Structures

Many important structures (e.g. buildings, bridges, aircraft frames) have buckling as a primary mode of failure. Because of
this, it is important for structural engineers to have at least a cursory knowledge of elastic stability phenomena. This course
will provide graduate-level Mechanical Engineering students with an overview of elastic stability in structures, and a brief
introduction to dynamic stability, as applied to rotating shafts. Applications of mathematical theory to real-world structural
design problems will be emphasized.

END

ME 10555:

Principles Of Nanotechnology

Prerequisites: (PHYS 02200 or PHYS 00220) and (PHYS 02201 or PHYS 00222) and CHEM 06100

This course explores the science and engineering at the nanometer scales. Topics include fundamentals of nanotechnology;
types and properties of nanomaterials; methods of fabrication; how these materials are characterized and the potential
applications.

END

ME 10556:

Special Topics in Mechatronics

Prerequisites: ME 10542

This course builds on the skills and background knowledge obtained from the Advanced Mechatronics course. The
students will further their exploration on more advanced topics as well as expand their exposure to various related fields.
The topics include advanced mechatronics components such as sensing, actuation, and power management, integrated
mechatronic systems such as robots (including forward and inverse kinematics of robotics), unmanned vehicles, and
automations, as well as related areas such as Programmable Logic Controller, Internet of Things, Blockchain, ethics, and
regulations. As the field of mechatronics is rapidly evolving, more front-line topics will be included to reflect the future
development.

END

ME 10560:

Composite Materials

This course presents the fundamental concepts in the mechanics and manufacturing of composite materials. Topics
include micromechanics (rule of mixtures and its applications in homogenization and the effective property determination)
and macromechanics of composites. Classical laminate theory and its application to calculate properties of lamina and
laminate, effects of stacking sequence, etc. are covered. The course briefly discusses failure theories and basic testing of
composite laminates. Simulation and hands-on projects (including composite laminate fabrication) are included to help
students gain a better understanding of composite materials.

END

ME 10561:

Engineering Optimization

The formulation and modeling aspects of engineering optimization problems are presented. These steps involve setting up
of the objective function to be minimized and the resource and system constraints to be satisfied. Solution techniques using
gradient based methods, zero order methods, and penalty techniques are discussed.

END

ME 10562:

FEA with ANSYS

This course presents the fundamentals of finite element analysis & simulation using Ansys (a commercial FEA code). Ansys
is widely used by mechanical and aerospace engineering industry. The course introduces methods to model material
properties, describe boundary conditions, and discretize solid bodies into proper finite elements. The Static Structural
Module of ANSYS workbench is covered in some details. Dynamics and transient simulations are also covered using
ANSYS Explicit module. Concepts related to topology optimization and analysis of composite materials (including
multi-scale modeling) are briefly discussed.

END

ME 10566:

Soft Robotics

This course introduces students to the fundamentals of the soft robots, wearable robotics, and other bioinspired soft
intelligent systems. A survey of the field will be provided, including recent advancements and comparison to traditional rigid
bodied robotic counterparts. The course focuses on principles of the design, fabrication and modeling of soft, flexible
sensors and actuators. Various actuation and sensing principles as well as modeling and simulation of soft materials and
structures will be discussed.

END

ME 10570:

Principles in Biomechanics

This course presents topics in the biomechanics of human motion. The course will encompass the use of engineering
principles to describe, analyze and assess human movement. Topics will include kinematics, kinetics, anthropometry applied
to the synthesis of human movement and muscle mechanics. A course project and laboratory project will enhance this
course.

END

ME 10571:

Principles in Biotransport

Prerequisites: ENGR 01341 or ME 10321

This course introduces biotransport in terms of heat transfer, mass transfer, and fluid mechanics related to the human
body. Some examples include cryosurgery of warts and drug delivery from skin patches. Beginning with biotransport
problem formulation, the course explores software tools that enable mathematical modeling. Fundamental principles of
model validation, mesh convergence, sensitivity analysis, and objective functions are presented. Several modeling labs are
used to build software skill and explore various heat and mass transfer processes inside and around the human body. Medicaldevice development concepts are presented, making a connection between modeling activities and product development.
The final weeks of this class are dedicated to a final project on a student-selected topic. The student will complete an
independent laboratory exercise or project.

END

ME 10572:

Principles in Biomaterials

Prerequisites: ENGR 01281 or ENGR 01283

The goal of this course is to introduce the numerous issues that factor into material selection for biomedical devices. Issues
to be examined include mechanical properties, biocompatibility, production costs, and ease of manufacture. This course will
familiarize students with relevant material issues and highlight the process for matching material performance with the
desired design characteristics and functionality.

END

ME 10576:

Principles in Orthopaedic Biomechanics

Prerequisites: ENGR 01272 or ENGR 01273

This course presents both introductory and emerging areas of orthopaedic biomechanics. The course will encompass the
use of engineering principles to describe, analyze and assess the musculoskeletal system. Topics will include bone and soft
tissue mechanics, implant systems, fracture fixation, joint replacements and reviews of current research.

END

ME 10580:

Aerospace Vehicles

This course provides an introduction to the design of aerospace vehicles, with a focus on passenger jet and combat aircraft.
Fundamental concepts of aerodynamics, aircraft performance, flight dynamics, and structural design are covered.
Unmanned air vehicles and space launch vehicles are also discussed briefly. Student teams are required to perform airplane
conceptual design and submit their project report.

END

ME 10581:

Aerodynamics

This course extends fluid mechanic concepts to study incompressible and compressible flows around symmetric and
cambered airfoil wings and other bodies. Fundamental concepts of aerodynamics including thin airfoil theory, lifting-line
theory, and vortex panel method are covered using analytical and numerical approaches. Wider applications of the course
material include wind turbine blades, automobiles, and sail boats.

END

ME 10582:

FLIGHT DYNAMICS

This course provides an introduction to flight dynamics of airplanes. Flight dynamic equations of unsteady motion and
linearized EOM are presented. Stability and control of longitudinal and lateral - directional motions are studied. Student
teams are required to perform S&C analysis of an airplane and submit a project report.

END

ME 10705:

Special Topics in Mechanical Engineering for Doctoral Students

Prerequisites: Doctoral Student Standing in Engineering

The students will study advanced topics in Mechanical Engineering. Special Topics courses may be traditional
classroom-based courses or research-related courses sponsored by specific advisors.

END

MED 01627:

Scholars Workshop IV

END

MED 01628:

Ambulatory Clerkship IV

END

MHP 00610:

Basic Laboratory Techniques-Biology

Prerequisites: MBS 00501 and MBS 00502 ("C" grade or better in each course)

This course will teach students the most basic techniques used in a modern biomedical laboratory, to prepare them to
integrate these techniques into more advanced processes they will use later. *This course is only open to students in the
Masters in Histopathology program.*

END

MHP 00611:

Histology I: Basic Tissue Types

Prerequisites: MBS 00501 and MBS 00502; or ANS 00501, with “C” grade or better in each course

This course introduces students to the basic tissue types, as well as some of the common stains used to differentiate
elements of tissue. In addition, students will learn to use a microscope and analyze photomicrographs critically. *This course
is only open to students in the Histopathology and Anatomical Sciences programs.*

END

MHP 00612:

Histology II: Techniques

Prerequisites: MHP 00610 and 00611 ("C" grade or better in each course)

This lab-intensive course builds upon the theory learned in Histology I: Basic Tissue Types. Students will be trained in
histological techniques in a hands-on setting, in order to develop the critical skills required to become a histotechnologist.
Students will learn to section various animal tissue utilizing a microtome and cryostat, and perform basic staining
procedures. *This course is only open to students in the Masters in Histopathology program.*

END

MHP 00613:

Histology III: Organ Systems

Prerequisites: MHP 00611 and MBS 00503 with C or better

In this course, students will apply their knowledge of tissue types to develop an understanding of organ structure and
function. This will include information specific to commonly used animal models (e.g. rats, mice, rabbits). *This course is
only open to students in the Histopathology and Anatomical Sciences programs.*

END

MHP 00614:

Basic Laboratory Animal Techniques

Prerequisites: MHP 00511 and MHP 00512 and MHP 00514.

This basic animal techniques course will teach students mouse colony management and preclinical research techniques.
This course is lab intensive . Students will receive one-on-one instruction for each of the indicated skills listed in the
syllabus. This format will allow student to develop basic skills in managing a mouse colony and processing of tissues, which is
valuable for job replacement upon graduation. *This course is only open to students in the Masters in Histopathology
program.*

END

MHP 00615:

Advanced Animal Techniques

Prerequisites: MHP 00610 and MHP 00611 and MHP 00612 and MHP 00614

This advanced animal techniques course will reinforce what students learned about basic mouse colony management and
teach students advanced preclinical research techniques. This course is lab intensive. Students will receive one-on-one
instruction for each of the indicated skills listed in the syllabus. This format will allow students to develop advanced animal
research skills, which is valuable for job placement upon graduation. *This course is only open to students in the Masters in
Histopathology program.

END

MHP 00616:

Topics in Pathology

Prerequisites: MBS 00503 & MHP 00611Co=requisite: MHP 00613

This course will provide students in the Masters in Histopathology program exposure to the pathology of major organ
systems. *This course is only open to students in the Histopathology and Anatomical Sciences programs.*

END

MUS 04514:

Choral Procedures

Designed as a laboratory course for choral directors in the organization of rehearsal techniques, selection and placing of
voices and development of programs. Special attention is given to individual vocal needs.

END

MUS 04536:

Chamber Music I

The study and performance of selected repertoire for specific instrumental groups and combinations. Students will be
assigned to a small ensemble and will be required to rehearse and to perform the chosen repertoire in a public setting.

END

MUS 04537:

Chamber Music II

The study and performance of selected repertoire for specific instrumental groups and combinations. Students will be
assigned to a small ensemble and will be required to rehearse and to perform the chosen repertoire in a public setting.

END

MUS 04540:

Jazz Arranging And Composition

The course presents techniques in arranging and composition in the jazz idiom and is tied to the course CD Project in that
it coordinates the needs of the second course through preparation in Jazz Arranging and Composition. Students will be
required to arrange and orchestrate existing compositions and compose original music in the jazz idiom.

END

MUS 04541:

Jazz Piano

This course in applied music for the non-pianist focuses on the basic keyboard skills needed by the professional jazz
musician, especially the use of the piano to realize harmonic progressions and concepts. The student must have passed the
piano proficiency exam before enrolling for this course.

END

MUS 04545:

Opera Role Study I

A complete opera role from the standard repertoire will be learned and performed in each semester through private
instruction and coaching, either in staged or unstaged, in public.

END

MUS 04546:

Opera Role Study II

A complete opera role from the standard repertoire will be learned and performed in each semester through private
instruction and coaching, either in staged or unstaged, in public.

END

MUS 04551:

Piano Accompanying I

This course in applied piano accompanying will pair the student with a vocal or instrumental student under the supervision
of the piano instructor.

END

MUS 04555:

Counterpoint

The principles of counterpoint and its practical application in musical literature are studied.

END

MUS 04557:

Advanced Orchestration

This course will introduce the conducting student to the practical considerations of performance on orchestral
instruments and their use in orchestral repertoire.

END

MUS 04560:

Form And Analysis

The course presents important contemporary approaches to the analysis and understanding of music of all periods
including those of the present. Students will present analyses of works appropriate to their graduate level studies in their
major area. This is a required course for all students in the master of music program.

END

MUS 04561:

Score Reading I

This course begins training the conducting student to read orchestral scores, including the mastery of clefs and
transposition. It is a requirement for the Master of Music in Instrumental Conducting.

END

MUS 04562:

Score Reading II

This course continues training the conducting student to read orchestral scores, including the complete mastery of clefs
and transposition, and the study of score reductions. It is a requirement for the Master of Music in Instrumental
Conducting.

END

MUS 04565:

Seminar In Band Conducting

This course will involve classroom discussion, research, and scholarly presentations of topics related to the business of
conducting, where students will share their views with other students and the facilitator. The class will visit rehearsals of
professional organizations and bands and will interview known professionals in the field. A lecture presentation by each
student on a relevant conducting topic will conclude the semester.

END

MUS 04570:

20th Century Literature And Techniques

This course explores 20th century music and the compositional techniques it embodies. Emphasis will be upon important
trends and developments that are still current in the music of today. Each student will present his/her own research in this
area of study as it relates to their major area of study. This is a required course for the master of music in composition.

END

MUS 04575:

Cd Project

The student will develop and produce a compact disk containing the student's original compositions through the choice of
repertoire to be performed, the rehearsal of the material, to the completion of the technical and business details leading to a
final product.

END

MUS 05500:

Analyzing Jazz Structures

Prerequisites: None

This course will guide the student through the basics of jazz song forms and solo construction. Analysis of both will be
stressed. This course is repeated for three semesters, focusing on different materials and repertoire each semester.

END

MUS 05501:

Jazz Analyzing Structures

Prerequisites: None

This course will guide the student through the basics of jazz song forms and solo construction. Analysis of both will be
stressed. This course is repeated for three semesters, focusing on different materials and repertoire each semester.

END

MUS 05502:

Analyzing Jazz Structures

Prerequisites: None

This course will guide the student through the basics of jazz song forms and solo construction. Analysis of both will be
stressed. This course is repeated for three semesters, focusing on different materials and repertoire each semester.

END

MUS 05503:

Jazz Composition

Prerequisites: None

This course will guide the student through the basics of jazz composition from historical perspectives, analysis of great
seminal composers, small and large form compositions, and analysis of various compositional styles.

END

MUS 08156:

Contemporary Music Ensemble

Dedicated to the performance of new music, this ensemble performs the works of Rowan composition students and other
contemporary composers.

END

MUS 10501:

Graduate Secondary Applied Instrument I

Private instruction on a student's major instrument. Designed to guide the development of each student toward the
realization of his fullest potential as a performer.

END

MUS 10502:

Graduate Secondary Applied Instrument II

Private instruction on a student's major instrument. Designed to guide the development of each student toward the
realization of his fullest potential as a performer.

END

MUS 10503:

Graduate Secondary Applied Instrument III

Private instruction on a student's major instrument. Designed to guide the development of each student toward the
realization of his fullest potential as a performer.

END

MUS 10504:

Graduate Secondary Applied Instrument IV

Private instruction on a student's major instrument. Designed to guide the development of each student toward the
realization of his fullest potential as a performer.

END

MUS 10505:

Graduate Secondary Applied Voice I

Private instruction in techniques of singing. Designed to guide the development of each student toward the realization of
his fullest potential as a performer.

END

MUS 10506:

Graduate Secondary Applied Voice II

Private instruction in techniques of singing. Designed to guide the development of each student toward the realization of
his fullest potential as a performer.

END

MUS 10507:

Graduate Secondary Applied Voice III

Private instruction in techniques of singing. Designed to guide the development of each student toward the realization of
his fullest as a performer.

END

MUS 10508:

Graduate Secondary Applied Voice IV

Private instruction in techniques of singing. Designed to guide the development of each student toward the realization of
his fullest potential as a performer.

END

MUS 10509:

Graduate Applied Instrument I

Private instruction on a student's major instrument. Designed to guide the development of each student toward the
realization of his fullest performer as a performer.

END

MUS 10510:

Graduate Applied Instrument II

Private instruction on a student's major instrument. Designed to guide the development of each student toward the
realization of his fullest potential as a performer.

END

MUS 10511:

Graduate Applied Instrument III

Private instruction on a student's major instrument. Designed to guide the development of each student toward the
realization of his fullest potential as a performer.

END

MUS 10512:

Graduate Applied Instrument IV

Private instruction on a student's major instrument. Designed to guide the development of each student toward the
realization of his fullest potential as a performer.

END

MUS 10513:

Graduate Applied Voice I

The continuation, on an advanced level, of the intensive study of vocal technique and performance begun in the
undergraduate level. Successful completion requires the preparation and performance of a graduate recital of sufficiently
high quality to provide access to professional auditions, doctoral programs and teaching positions in higher education.

END

MUS 10514:

Graduate Applied Voice II

The continuation, on an advanced level, of the intensive study of vocal technique and performance begun in the
undergraduate level. Successful completion requires the preparation and performance of a graduate recital of sufficiently
high quality to provide access to professional auditions, doctoral programs and teaching positions in higher education.

END

MUS 10515:

Graduate Applied Voice III

The continuation, on an advanced level, of the intensive study of vocal technique and performance begun in the
undergraduate level. Successful completion requires the preparation and performance of a graduate recital of sufficiently
high quality to provide access to professional auditions, doctoral programs and teaching positions in higher education.

END

MUS 10516:

Graduate Applied Voice IV

The continuation, on an advanced level, of the intensive study of vocal technique and performance begun in the
undergraduate level. Successful completion requires the preparation and performance of a graduate recital of sufficiently
high quality to provide access to professional auditions, doctoral programs and teaching positions in higher education.

END

MUS 10517:

Graduate Applied Instrument I

Private instruction on a student's major instrument. Designed to guide the development of each student toward the
realization of his fullest potential as a performer.

END

MUS 10518:

Graduate Applied Instrument II

Private instruction on a student's major instrument. Designed to guide the development of each student toward the
realization of his fullest potential as a performer.

END

MUS 10519:

Graduate Applied Instrument III

Private instruction on a student's major instrument. Designed to guide the development of each student toward the
realization of his fullest potential as a performer.

END

MUS 10520:

Graduate Applied Instrument IV

Private instruction on a student's major instrument. Designed to guide the development of each student toward the
realization of his fullest potential as a performer.

END

MUS 10521:

Graduate Applied Voice I

The continuation, on an advanced level, of the intensive study of vocal technique and performance begun in the
undergraduate level. Successful completion requires the preparation and performance of a graduate recital of sufficiently
high quality to provide access to professional auditions, doctoral programs and teaching positions in higher education.

END

MUS 10522:

Graduate Applied Voice II

The continuation, on an advanced level, of the intensive study of vocal technique and performance begun in the
undergraduate level. Successful completion requires the preparation and performance of a graduate recital of sufficiently
high quality to provide access to professional auditions, doctoral programs and teaching positions in higher education.

END

MUS 10523:

Graduate Applied Voice III

The continuation, on an advanced level, of the intensive study of vocal technique and performance begun in the
undergraduate level. Successful completion requires the preparation and performance of a graduate recital of sufficiently
high quality to provide access to professional auditions, doctoral programs and teaching positions in higher education.

END

MUS 10524:

GRADUATE APPLIED VOICE IV

The continuation, on an advanced level, of the intensive study of vocal technique and performance begun in the
undergraduate level. Successful completion requires the preparation and performance of a graduate recital of sufficiently
high quality to provide access to professional auditions, doctoral programs and teaching positions in higher education.

END

MUS 10525:

Graduate Music Composition I

The student develops his undergraduate compositional skills, completing a major work for chamber ensemble which
demonstrates an ability to use contemporary compositional ideas in the organization of music.

END

MUS 10526:

Graduate Music Composition II

This course prepares the student to complete his/her major requirement in music composition: a thesis consisting of a
major compositional work and a paper describing its genesis. May be re-taken.

END

MUS 10527:

Graduate Music Composition I

The student develops his undergraduate composition skills, completing a major work for chamber ensemble which
demonstrates an ability to use contemporary compositional ideas in the organization of music.

END

MUS 10528:

Graduate Music Composition II

This course prepares the student to complete his/her major requirement in music composition: a thesis consisting of a
major compositional work and a paper describing its genesis. May be re-taken.

END

MUS 10529:

Graduate Conducting I

Private instructing in conducting. This course in the conducting sequence, is designed to guide the development of
conductors to a full realization of their technical and musical potential.

END

MUS 10530:

Graduate Conducting II

Private instructing in conducting. This course in the conducting sequence, is designed to guide the development of
conductors to a full realization of their technical and musical potential.

END

MUS 10531:

Graduate Conducting III

Private instructing in conducting. This course in the conducting sequence, is designed to guide the development of
conductors to a full realization of their technical and musical potential. During semester III of the conducting sequence, the
student is expected to serve as Assistant Conductor of an appropriate ensemble at the discretion of the conducting faculty.

END

MUS 10532:

Graduate Conducting IV

Private instructing in conducting. This course in the conducting sequence, is designed to guide the development of
conductors to a full realization of their technical and musical potential. During semester IV of the applied conducting
sequence, the student is expected to serve as Assistant Conductor of an appropriate ensemble at the discretion of the
conducting faculty. In addition, as a culminating activity, the student will present a full-length conducting recital.

END

MUS 10533:

Graduate Conducting I

Private instructing in conducting. This course in the conducting sequence, is designed to guide the development of
conductors to a full realization of their technical and musical potential.

END

MUS 10534:

Graduate Conducting II

Private instructing in conducting. This course in the conducting sequence, is designed to guide the development of
conductors to a full realization of their technical and musical potential.

END

MUS 10535:

Graduate Conducting III

Private instructing in conducting. This course in the conducting sequence, is designed to guide the development of
conductors to a full realization of their technical and musical potential. During semester III of the conducting sequence, the
student is expected to serve as Assistant Conductor of an appropriate ensemble at the discretion of the conducting faculty.

END

MUS 10536:

Graduate Conducting IV

Private instructing in conducting. This course in the conducting sequence, is designed to guide the development of
conductors to a full realization of their technical and musical potential. During semester IV of the conducting sequence, the
student is expected to serve as Assistant Conductor of an appropriate ensemble at the discretion of the conducting faculty.
In addition, as a culminating activity, the student will present a full-length conducting recital.

END

MUS 10537:

Graduate Ensemble: Concert Choir

END

MUS 10538:

Graduate Ensemble: Concert Choir

END

MUS 10539:

Graduate Ensemble: Concert Choir

END

MUS 10540:

Graduate Ensemble: Concert Choir

END

MUS 10541:

Graduate Ensemble: Jazz Band

END

MUS 10542:

Graduate Ensemble: Jazz Band

END

MUS 10543:

Graduate Ensemble: Jazz Band

END

MUS 10544:

Graduate Ensemble: Jazz Band

END

MUS 10545:

Graduate Ensemble: Lab Band

END

MUS 10546:

Graduate Ensemble: Lab Band

END

MUS 10547:

Graduate Ensemble: Lab Band

END

MUS 10548:

Graduate Ensemble: Lab Band

END

MUS 10549:

Graduate Ensemble: Orchestra

END

MUS 10550:

Graduate Ensemble: Orchestra

END

MUS 10551:

Graduate Ensemble: Orchestra

END

MUS 10552:

Graduate Ensemble: Orchestra

END

MUS 10553:

Graduate Ensemble: Wind Ensemble

END

MUS 10554:

Graduate Ensemble: Wind Ensemble

END

MUS 10555:

Graduate Ensemble: Wind Ensemble

END

MUS 10556:

Graduate Ensemble: Wind Ensemble

END

MUS 40315:

Entrepreneurship in the Music Industry

Prerequisites: MUS 40111 and MUS 40113 and MUS 40212

This course provides an in-depth view of the major technological disruptions and the ensuring business opportunities that
have shaped the music industry, from wax cylinder to vinyl record, cassette, CD, MP3, and Internet streaming services, with
a particular focus on how the digital age has utterly transformed the music industry. Comprehensive research and analysis of
current and cutting-edge music business models and marketing strategies complete this course curriculum.

END

MUS 50509:

Music Education Workshop

Students will engage in hands-on, active music making and learning connected to a variety of topics and content areas in
music education. All workshops will emphasize practical application of content to music teaching settings.

END

MUS 50510:

Special Topics Seminars in Music Education

Seminars will focus on special topics designed to reflect contemporary and changing practices and concerns in the field of
music education.

END

MUS 50511:

Research Methods in Music Education

Research in Music Education Course Description: In this introductory course, students will explore and analyze music
education research in several research paradigms. Students will learn to locate, digest, and apply the research literature in
music education to their own practice, as well as prepare an action research proposal for potential implementation in their
school setting. Students will also focus on building skills that allow them to write in a clear and concise manner and within
APA guidelines.

END

MUS 50520:

History of Music Education

This course provides an overview of the historical development of both local and global music education practices. Past
and present methods of teaching and learning music will be discussed, including their rationales, influences, and limitations.

END

MUS 50540:

Social and Psychological Environments of Music Learning

This course is focused on the psychological and sociological foundations of music education, and how theory influences
research and curriculum in the field. Different perspectives in the field of music education will be explored and discussed in
terms of how these theories operate in current practice.

END

MUS 50610:

Master's Final Presentation and Project

Students have the option of completing a capstone final project or a thesis. The nature and structure of the capstone
project will be proposed by the student (to be approved by the faculty) and may include a curriculum project, a literature
review, or other artifact that connects theory to practice. Both capstone options will be completed under the supervision of
a faculty member and will require a public presentation of the work as a criteria for program completion.

END

MUS 50621:

Master's Thesis in Music Education

This course is taken at the end of the master's program in music education, and provides the student with the opportunity
to write and defend a master's thesis based on original scholarship and publish it.

END

MUS 50630:

Equity, Access, and Music Education

This course is focused on topics related to equity and access as it relates to the field of music education. Literature related
to issues of social justice, critical pedagogy, and inclusion will be explored and discussed in terms of current practices and
issues in the field.

END

MUS 50650:

Philosophy of Music Education

This course is focused on the philosophical discourses that influence education in general and music education specifically.
Taking both local-historical and global perspectives, students will critique and critically examine the purpose and role of
music education in communities and schools.

END

MUS 50660:

Innovation in Curriculum and Instruction

In this course we will explore the issues related to developing music curricula for students in grades PK-12, in music teacher
education programs, and beyond. Together we will consider what, why, how, and who we teach through historical,
philosophical, psychological, and sociological lenses, and gain a deeper understanding of educational policy and its impact on
curricula. Students will examine and evaluate existing frameworks, assessment tools, and instructional strategies, and design
their own individualized curriculum unit/project.

END

MUS 50670:

Global Musics in Education

The purpose of this course is to acquaint students with the many musics of the world, to provide strategies for its use in the
music classroom, and to facilitate an understanding of the study of music and culture. The three strands of the course, world
music, world music pedagogy, and ethnomusicology, will be addressed through reading, listening, planning, presenting, and
discussing course content. Upon completion of this course, one will be to able to accurately identify musical characteristics
of a variety of musics, utilize a culturally informed approach to teaching world music, and incorporate ethnomusicological
fieldwork methods to explore an unfamiliar musical culture.

END

MUS 97301:

Trombone Class

Designed for Music Education majors, this course addresses trombone pedagogy and basic trombone performance.

END

MUS 97302:

Percussion Class

A study of rudimental and ensemble techniques of snare drum, timpani, bass drum, cymbals and accessory instruments.

END

MUS 97309:

Trumpet Class

Designed for Music Education majors, this course addresses trumpet pedagogy and basic trumpet performance.

END

MUS 97310:

Tuba Class

Designed for Music Education majors, this course addresses tuba pedagogy and basic tuba performance.

END

MUS 97312:

Conducting-Instrumental II

Prerequisites: MUS 97212

This course demonstrates and rehearses the skills of instrumental conducting through music for instrumental ensembles.

END

MUS 97313:

Conducting-Choral II

Prerequisites: MUS 97213

Students apply basic conducting techniques to repertoire spanning each of the major time periods. In addition to gesture,
great emphasis is given to score reading and score analysis skills.

END

MUS 97400:

Voice Class

A study of the basic principles of singing taught in a group setting. Students will learn beginners breathing technique, tone
placement and projection through the singing of goup and solo repertoire. Course is open to non-music majors.

END

MUS 97401:

Bassoon Class

This course teaches the fundamentals of the bassoon.

END

MUS 98101:

Foundations of Music Therapy

Prerequisites: Admissions to Music Therapy Program.

Develop an understanding of the methodological and theoretical foundations of this discipline. Learn how to use music as
a therapeutic tool to treat a variety of clients, as well as the sociological, psychological, and philosophical theories of music.

END

MUS 98102:

Principles of Music Therapy I

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy Program

In Principles of Music Theory I students will learn to interact with people who have learning, neurological, motor, and
medical problems. Students will need to focus on music therapy literature specific for this group of people and be ready to
apply their theoretical studies to clinical work.

END

MUS 98103:

Music Therapy Practicum I

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program

This course will provide an opportunity for students to acquire supervised experience using music therapy, including
assessment, treatment planning, evaluation, and other aspects that support clinical practice. Students will complete a total
of 60 supervised clinical hours as part of this course.

END

MUS 98104:

Therapeutic Principles for Music Therapists

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program

This course focuses on understanding of therapeutic principles and the therapeutic relationship that are at the basis of
music therapy treatment. Topics covered are foundational to music therapy, focusing on therapeutic principles underlying
music therapy. These include awareness of personal motivation and values in therapy, dynamics and process of the
therapeutic relationship, awareness of ethical issues in therapy, group dynamics, multicultural awareness and applications to
therapy, and theories underlying various approaches to therapy.

END

MUS 98105:

Clinical Piano Skills I

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program; functional piano competence; students must have passed the piano proficiency exam required of undergraduate music majors.

Students learn piano skills needed to implement music therapy in clinical settings. Includes harmonization, accompanying
in various styles, and various styles of improvisation. Course includes application of musical concepts and terminologies,
such as modes, idioms, styles, scales, and various musical forms into clinical scenarios.

END

MUS 98106:

Clinical Guitar Skills

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program

This course is designed to enable students to accompany themselves and to lead others in the singing of simple folk and
popular songs, progressing from simple strumming and finger picking to more advanced accompaniment patterns,
transposition and the use of the capo.

END

MUS 98107:

Music Applications to Music Therapy I

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program

This course will provide an opportunity for music therapy students to apply the music skills that they are learning in other
courses (music and music therapy) to the type of musical situations that they will encounter as music therapists. Skills to be
practiced include leading songs using simple accompaniment styles, playing and singing songs of basic music therapy
repertoire using Q-chord, autoharp, and percussion instruments, and sight reading basic music therapy repertoire.

END

MUS 98108:

Psychology of Music

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program

This course will provide an opportunity for students to learn about psychological foundations of music, including
neurology and the brain, music cognition and perception, emotional meaning of music, musical development and learning,
and testing for musical ability. Students will be expected to apply the knowledge acquired in this course in music therapy,
music education, and other musical interests.

END

MUS 98109:

Principles of Music Therapy II

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program

In Principles of Music Therapy II students will learn to interact with people who have learning, neurological, motor, and
medical problems. Students will need to focus on music therapy literature specific for this group of people and be ready to
apply their theoretical studies to clinical work.

END

MUS 98110:

Music Therapy Research Methods

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program

This course will focus on research methods in conducting, reading, and interpreting music in the context of music therapy;
it will include quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methodologies.

END

MUS 98111:

Music Therapy Practicum II

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program; MUS 98103

This course will provide an opportunity for students to acquire supervised experience using music therapy, including
assessment, treatment planning, evaluation, and other aspects that support clinical practice. Students will complete a total
of 60 supervised clinical hours as part of this course.

END

MUS 98112:

Clinical Piano Skills II

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program; MUS 98105

Further development of piano skills needed to implement music therapy in clinical settings. Includes harmonization,
accompanying in various styles, and various styles of improvisation. Course includes application of musical concepts and
terminologies, such as modes, idioms, styles, scales, and various musical forms into clinical scenarios. Builds on material
learned in Clinical Piano Skills I and includes additional applications to clinical settings.

END

MUS 98113:

Music Applications to Music Therapy II

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program; MUS 98107

This course will provide an opportunity for music therapy students to apply the music skills that they are learning in other
courses (music and music therapy) to the type of musical situations that they will encounter as music therapists. Skills to be
practiced include leading songs using simple accompaniment styles, playing and singing songs of basic music therapy
repertoire using Q-chord, autoharp, percussion instruments, and guitar, and sight reading basic music therapy repertoire.

END

MUS 98115:

Music Therapy Practicum III

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program; MUS 98111

This course will provide an opportunity for students to acquire supervised experience using music therapy, including
assessment, treatment planning, evaluation, and other aspects that support clinical practice. Students will complete a total
of 60 supervised clinical hours as part of this course.

END

MUS 98116:

Music Applications to Music Therapy III

Prerequisites: Admission to Music Therapy program; MUS 98113

This course will provide an opportunity for music therapy students to apply the music skills that they are learning in other
courses (music and music therapy) to the type of musical situations that they will encounter as music therapists, refining
their skills in these areas. Skills to be practiced include leading songs using simple accompaniment styles, playing and singing
songs of basic music therapy repertoire using Q-chord, autoharp, percussion instruments, guitar, and piano and keyboard,
and sight reading basic music therapy repertoire.

END

MUS 98117:

Residency in Music Therapy

Prerequisites: Completion of all courses in Music Therapy program; residency is final requirement; MUS 98101, MUS 98108, MUS 98102, 
MUS 98109, MUS 98110, MUS 98103, MUS 98111, MUS 98115, MUS 98105, MUS 98112, MUS 98106, MUS 98107, MUS 98113, MUS 98116, MUS 98104, PSY 03200

Residency of 1040 hours at an AMTA-or Rowan-approved clinical training center. Application is made upon departmental
approval. Development of music therapy clinical skills. Requires clinical work and ongoing supervision from the clinical site
(residency supervisor) and/or music therapy faculty. Student will plan and lead individual and group music therapy sessions,
write assessment and goal plans, participate in treatment teams, and take part in other activities of the clinical facility. The
residency should be taken at a medical facility.

END

MUSG 05547:

Music And The Related Arts

The aesthetics of music is approached from the point of view that the same forces motivate all the arts and that significant
parallels exist among them. This course may not be offered annually.

END

MUSG 06303:

Choral Literature

A chronological study and analysis of small and large choral works from the early chant to the present is stressed through
recordings, live performances and class participation. Conducting of choral work is a major activity of this course.

END

MUSG 06503:

Jazz History

This course presents an overview of jazz history and requires the student to prepare indepth studies of any three topics
related to the history of jazz, chosen in consultation with the professor. Students must exhibit their mastery of these areas
by written and oral assignments.

END

MUSG 06505:

History And Literature Of Guitar And Lute

This course provides indepth study of the literature of the family of plucked instruments, especially the guitar and lute,
from the Renaissance to the present day.

END

MUSG 06506:

Art Song Literature

The indepth study of the evolution and development of the art song as a genre, its development, structure, styles and
composers from the 17th century to the present. Aural familiarity and stylistic recognition will be emphasized, as will the
association of song composers with their works and periods.

END

MUSG 06509:

String Instrument Literature

This course explores the literature written for stringed instruments from both stylistic and technical points. Students will
study and analyze the most important solo works for the bowed string instruments and will be expected to identify aurally
these works and to provide written analyses of several. It is a required course for string students in the master of music
program and is available also as an elective.

END

MUSG 06510:

Keyboard Literature

This course presents a broad overview of the massive literature for the keyboard from Baroque through the end of the 20th
century. Students learn to listen, to analyze, and to identify the stylistic characteristics of the great composers for the piano.
They will, within the course of the semester, choose several composers whose works are of particular interest to them,
thoroughly catalogue their literature and analyze in depth several compositions by each. The results of this work will be
presented in oral and written form.

END

MUSG 06511:

Twentieth Century Band Literature

This course will survey all levels of band repertoire, from elementary through high school, and standard college and
professional band works. Students will have a knowledge of where to find musical selections for any scenario, from teaching
works to standard competition pieces and public performance selections.

END

MUSG 06542:

Opera Literature

An historical survey of opera, its development and composers, from 1600 to the present. The course will emphasize the
most important operas, their plots, forms and main musical numbers.

END

MUSG 06545:

Development And Interpretation Of Choral Literature

Studies choral music from Gregorian chant to contemporary works. Representative works of various types studied in
detail. These are drawn from various categories such as motet, madrigal, polyphonic chanson, cantata and oratorio. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

MUSG 06546:

Development And Interpretation Of Symphonic Literature

The evolution of instruments, the standardization of the orchestra in the classic period, the introduction of new
instruments and the growth of the orchestra are studied. The principal orchestral forms such as the symphony and the
concerto are studied and various types of orchestration are examined. This course may not be offered annually.

END

MUSG 06555:

SEL TOPICS-MUSIC ED

END

SMED 01120:

Foundations Of Music Education

Foundations of Music Education is an introductory course in the music education program. It provides a broad overview of
the field of music education, addressing the historical development of music education in the United States as well as
current approaches and issues in the field. The course is framed by three guiding questions: What is the purpose of music
education?; How can students best explore music?; and How can teachers best create music learning experiences for their
students? In addition, two projects that extend throughout the music education major are introduced: a personal philosophy
of music education, and a digital portfolio.

END

SMED 32329:

Teaching/Learning Music A: Elementary General Music

Prerequisites: C- or better in MUS 04103, MUS 04104, MUS 04216, MUS 04217, EDUC 01284, READ 30319 and SMED 33420

The methods, materials and techniques of teaching music from K through 12 are surveyed. Attention is given to the
developmental sequence in the building of musical concepts necessary for the organization of an effective general music
program in the public schools.

END

SMED 32330:

Teaching/Learning Music B: Vocal Methods And Techniques

This course, along with other courses in a series, helps to prepare students to teach the choral arts in the public schools
with particular attention to grades 7-12. Techniques of teaching, vocal training, choral organization and the philosophy of
teaching choral music are the areas to be emphasized.

END

SMED 32331:

Teaching/Learning Music B: Instrumental Methods And Techniques

A survey is made of the necessary understanding, techniques, and materials to develop an effective instrumental music
program. Consideration is given to the place of instrumental music and its relationship to the total school program.

END

SMED 32502:

Teaching Of Music Theory

Methods of teaching theory such as listening, reading, writing, analyzing, playing and creating are examined. The content
of music theory courses and representative music theory texts are analyzed and evaluated. This course may not be offered
annually.

END

SMED 32505:

Selected Approaches In Music Education

The approaches are those of: Gordon, Kodaly, Orff, Montessori, Suzuki, and Jacques-Dalcroze. The student will research
each approach, and while doing an in-depth study on one approach, develop a curriculum for his or her teaching situation.
This course is offered bi-annually.

END

SMED 32506:

Guitar Pedagogy

The student will be made aware of the philosophies of guitar instruction, be familiar with the two or three most
widely-used method books and will have begun to develop his/her own pedagogical system. A practicum experience is
included in the course.

END

SMED 32507:

Piano Pedagogy

The course will systematically present the pedagogical methods and materials readily found in the United States for
teaching beginning, intermediate and early advanced students of the piano. A supervised practicum is an essential part of the
course.

END

NURS 03303:

Comprehensive Health Assessment

This course builds upon the Registered Nurse’s fundamental knowledge and skills of health assessment. In utilizing a
systematic approach, the student will develop a holistic approach in assessing the patient throughout the lifespan. Upon
completion, the student will show competency in obtaining a thorough health history and becoming efficient in the physical
skills of inspection, palpation, percussion and auscultation. Differences between normal and abnormal findings will be
explored and appropriate documentation of findings will be stressed. Students will also be exposed to the cultural
differences in health and will incorporate evidence based approaches to assessment.

END

NURS 03304:

Nursing Informatics

This course reviews the information needs and information systems related to nursing practice. Students will experience
the manner in which informatics supports all areas of practice, including education, clinical practice, administration and
research.

END

NURS 03309:

Topics In Health Care Ethics

Students in this nursing course will examine moral dilemmas created or intensified by recent advances in medical
technology and study ways of analyzing those dilemmas. Discussion topics include: euthanasia and the right to die, abortion,
behavior modification, allocation of scarce medical resources, in vitro fertilization, genetic screening and engineering and
human experimentation. These moral dilemmas will be related to nursing.

END

NURS 03401:

Community Health Nursing

Prerequisites: NURS 03303

This course will explore how community health nurses use concepts from nursing and public health to provide
comprehensive, continuous, preventative healthcare thereby promoting health for communities, populations at risk,
aggregates, families, and individuals. This course prepares the RN to BSN student to develop competencies in managing
health status in the context of multicultural communities. Students will be able to expand current knowledge and skills,
develop enhanced research and critically thinking skills with the application of these skills to the multicultural community
and the global society considering the biopsychosocial, cultural, ethical, legal, and economic issues that impact the
community as a client. The clinical practicum focuses on clients with diverse needs in a variety of settings.

END

NURS 03403:

Nursing Care Delivery Systems

Prerequisites: NURS 03303

The focus of this course is the professional nurse’s leadership and management role within health care delivery systems.
The multi-faceted aspects of the role of the nurse as leader and manager are explored in depth, with emphasis on the role of
the nurse as change agent. Organizational behavior, decision-making, the change process and the management of health care
organizations are components of this course. The concepts of professionalism, leadership-management, research and
teaching-learning are integrated with the professional nurse’s role. This course prepares students to function as change
agents in the health care delivery system. The clinical component focuses on the application of relevant theory and research
as a basis for decision-making. Students are mentored by faculty, and interact with members of the nursing leadership team
to explore Nursing leadership.

END

NURS 03404:

Research Applications In Nursing Practice - WI

Prerequisites: STAT 02100 and COMP 01112

This course introduces students to the concepts and process of research in nursing. Emphasis is placed on writing and
critiquing published studies and developing plans for using research findings in practice.

END

NURS 03405:

Health Care Policy And Finance

The focus of this course is the professional nurse's role in health care policy and finances within health care systems. The
multi-faceted aspects of health care policy making and financing within today's ever-changing health care environment are
explored. Risk management and quality care are integrated into the course. This course gives the student a financial
understanding of the health care delivery system. Students are exposed to the political and legislative process within health
care agencies and health care policy development at the state and federal levels. Ethical and legal issues in nursing and health
care are explored.

END

NURS 03503:

Nursing Research

Prerequisites: STAT 02100 or the equivalentandenrollment in the UMDNJ/Rowan JointR.N. to B.S.N. Program and NURS 03404

Students focus on the theoretical and scientific underpinnings for evidence-based advanced nursing practice. In-depth
critical analysis of scientific research and methods for systemic review, as relevant to patient care and health policy
outcomes, are emphasized. Ethical, legal, economic, and cultural issues surrounding the conduct and utilization of research
practice are examined. Students obtain skills in using bibliographic databases. The roles of the advanced practice nurse in
research are explored.

END

NURS 05500:

Integrated Information Technology in Health Care

Prerequisites: BSN, BS, BA (in health care related field) and evidence of successful completion of an undergraduate computer course that contained content in healthcare informatics.

The delivery of efficient health care requires the integration of information technology. This course builds on basic
informatics knowledge and challenges the learner to apply these principles to the health care setting. The student will
consider emerging technology and creatively investigate ways to improve patient care.

END

NURS 05501:

Advanced Health Assessment

Prerequisites: Licensed as a Registered Nurse (R.N.)AND BSN OR BA (If student has BA then NURS03303 AND NURS 03404 AND NURS 03405)

Advanced Health Assessment prepqres the graduate nurse to identify abnormal findings and critically analyze these
findings. Critical analysis will result in problem identification and planning. This course will serve as a core requirement for
completion of a graduate nursing degree.

END

NURS 05502:

Teaching and Learning in Nursing

Successful Completion of Core MSN courses with a minimum GPA of 3.0

This course begins preparation for the professional nurse to investigate teaching and learning in the nursing field. This
initial course lays the foundation for more advanced testing and curricular development courses. Key concepts for
investigation include evidence based teaching, learning theories, nursing education theories, technoligical advances in
nursing education and clinical competency.

END

NURS 05503:

Advanced Nursing Research

Prerequisites: STAT 02100 or equivalent; enrollment in Rowan Nursing Program

Students focus on the theoretical and scientific underpinnings for evidence-based advanced nursing practice. In-depth
critical analysis of scientific research and methods for systemic review, as relevant to patient care and health policy
outcomes, are emphasized. Ethical, legal, economic, and cultural issues surrounding the conduct and utilization of research
practice are examined. Students utlilize sills in searching bibliographic databases. The roles of the master's prepared nurse in
research are explored.

END

NURS 05504:

Advanced Pathophysiology

Prerequisites: Licensure as a registered nurse and NURS 03303

This course describes the disordered physiology and clinical consequences resulting from common disease processes.
Seminar discussions focus on alterations in normal functions of major organ systems. Through problem-solving exercises and
case studies, students are encouraged to recognize the pathophysiologic basis of clinical findings associated with disease
processes. This course serves as an essential link between the basic sciences and clinical management.

END

NURS 05505:

Advanced Pharmacology

Prerequisites: Licensure as a registered nurse and NURS 03303 and NURS 05504

This course expands students' knowledge of clinical pharmacology to provide a sound basis from which to engage in
prescriptive drug management. Pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics and pharmacotherapeutics of drug classes are
explored through a variety of teaching-learning methodologies, including seminar discussion, problem-based case study
presentations, focused readings, and web-based exercises.

END

NURS 05506:

Learning Assessment in the Classroom and Clinical Environment

Successful Completion of Core MSN courses with a minimum GPA of 3.0
Nurse educators use a variety of strategies to evaluate student learning in a variety of settings. This course prepares the
nurse educator to use assessment and evaluation strategies effectively in relationship to all domains of learning.

END

NURS 05507:

Leadership & Care Delivery Environment

Prerequisites: Licensed as a Registered Nurse (R.N.)AND BSN OR BA (If BA then NURS 03303 AND NURS 03404 AND NURS 03405)

This course is focuses on the analysis, integration and application of principles of leadership and management to health
care organizations and to population-based efforts across the health care delivery system. The concepts of leadership and
stewardship are explored from a historical and contemporary perspective with particular application to the health
professions. The course fosters self awareness as a necessary condition for effective self management and self development,
and a prerequisite for leading others. Special emphasis is placed on the practical skills needed for nurses to succeed as leaders
and managers in today's local, state, national and international health care environment.

END

NURS 05508:

Special Issues & Trends In Nursing

Prerequisites: Licensed as a Registered Nurse (R.N.)AND BSN OR BA (if BA then NURS 03303 AND NURS 03404 AND NURS 03405)

This course focuses on current trends and issues in professional nursing and health care delivery. The course is individually
tailored to meet each student's educational goals and area of special interest in nursing and healthcare delivery in the
twenty-first century. The topic will vary dependent on the student's interests, goals and objectives as discussed with faculty.
Students under the direction of an instructor complete individually designed projects addressing major trends and issues in
their emphasis area of nursing and health care delivery.

END

NURS 05509:

Clinical Nurse Leader Role

Prerequisites: Minimum GPA of 3.0: NURS 03504 AND NURS 03505 AND NURS 03503 AND NURS 05501 ANDAH 05501
AND NURS 05507 AND NURS 05508 ANDLICENSED AS A REGISTERED NURSE (R.N.) AND BSN

This course immerses the student in the role of the Clinical Nurse Leader. The Clinical Nurse Leader (CNL) is a master's
prepared nurse who delivers expertise in care as a generalist. The CNL manages care for patients, individuals, families, and
communities. The CNL functions as a provider and manager for care at the point of system entry and strives to produce
quality based outcomes. This course discusses the role of the clinical nurse leader as leader, outcomes manager and care
environment manager. The graduate student, through participatory learning, will master the key concepts that are
imperative to the successful transition into the CNL role.

END

NURS 05510:

Evidence Based Practice In Illness/Disease Management

Prerequisites: Minimum GPA of 3.0: NURS 03504 AND NURS 03505 AND NURS 03503 AND NURS 05501 ANDAH 05501
AND NURS 05507 AND NURS 05508 ANDLICENSED AS A REGISTERED NURSE (R.N.) AND BSN

Evidence based practice in illness and disease management is a requirement for quality care delivery. This course serves as
one of the mandatory courses in the clinical nurse leader track. This course discusses care management, client outcomes,
application of assessment, pharmacology, and pathophysiology to specific disease states, and evidence-based practice.

END

NURS 05511:

Clinical Nurse Leader Practicum I

Prerequisites: NURS 05509 AND NURS 05510

This course prepares the graduate nursing student for the full clinical implementation of the Clinical Nurse Leader role.
Concepts of care environment management are discussed and explored in the clinical setting. Through and interwoven
marriage of didactic and clinical experience, the registered nurse will begin to experience the role of the Clincal Nurse
Leader. 200 Clinical Hours Required

END

NURS 05512:

Clinical Nurse Leader Practicum II

Prerequisites: NURS 05511

The Clinical Nurse Leader (CNL) is a master's prepared nurse who delivers expertise in care as a generalist. The CNL
manages care for patients, individuals, families, and communities. The CNL functions as a provider and manager for care at
the point of system entry and strives to produce quality based outcomes. This course prepares the graduate nursing student
for the full clinical implementation of the Clinical Nurse Leader role. Through an interwoven marriage of didactic and
clinical experience, the registered nurse will experience the role of the Clinical Nurse Leader. 200 Clinical Hourse Required

END

NURS 05513:

Nursing Curricular Design and Evaluation

Prerequisites: Successful completion of CORE MSN courses with minimum GPA of 3.0, NURS 05502, NURS 05506

Nurse educators are responsible to develop curricular plans that reflect contemporary health care trends. Curricular plans
should hinge upon realistic program outcomes that prepare graduates to function effectively in the health care environment.
This course explores curricular design, program outcomes, and robust changes in response to curricular evaluation.

END

NURS 05514:

Nurse Educator: Leadership, Quality, and Planned Change in the Practice
Environment I

Prerequisites: NURS 05502 and NURS 05506

The nurse educator must be aware of the political, institutional, social and economic factors that impact the role. This
course introduces the nurse educator student to concepts of competence, self-assessment, quality improvement and
scholarship within the educational environment. Nursing theory and nursing research are presented as a focus for clinical
practice implications. The student is provided the opportunity to analyze nurse education and identify an area of practice
interest by exploring various roles, such as nurse education at bedside, nurse educator in technical setting, and nurse
educator in academia.
100 clinical hours required

END

NURS 05515:

Nurse Educator: Leadership, Quality, and Planned Change in the Practice
Environment II

Prerequisites: NURS 05514

This course serves as the final comprehensive nurse educator course. All course activities are based upon the eight
competencies of a nurse educator defined by the National League of Nursing (NLN) and supported by the American
Association of the College of Nursing (AACN). Through ongoing faculty tutelage the graduate student completes eight
competency projects. In addition, clinical submersion in the role of nurse educator occurs in a precepted environment.
200 clinical hours required

END

NURS 05516:

Epidemiology Health Promotion & Disease Management

Prerequisites: Completion of the core MSN course with a GPA of 3.0 or higher and admission into a Nurse Practitioner specialization

This course introduces the graduate nursing student to the concepts of epidemiology and population based medicine.
Theories of wellness, health promotion and global opportunities for healthy living are presented. Through synthesis of these
concepts the advanced practice nursing student will develop a theory of practice that incorporates health promotion
throughout the lifespan. This course examines the relation of human groups to their environments as mediated by culture.

END

NURS 05517:

Nurse Practitioner Role: History, Practice Regulations, Reimbursement and Ethics

Prerequisites: Completion of the core MSN course with a GPA of 3.0 or higher and admission into a Nurse Practitioner specialization

This course will investigate the role of the nurse practitioner from a historical perspective with implications to current
practice requirements. The nurse practitioner student will investigate the history of their specialty nurse practice, the
regulations that apply to their specialty nurse practice, their role as a leader and advocate. A synthesis of this information
that incorporates evidence based practice initiatives will occur. Special emphasis on ethical and cultural diversity and
considerations about age variations, cultural variations, religious variations, health promotion and diversity across the
lifespan will assist nurse practitioner students in developing their practice own practice philosophy.

END

NURS 05518:

AGACNP: Assessment, Diagnosis, & Differential Disease Management

Prerequisites: Completion of the core MSN courses with a GPA of 3.0 or higher and admission in the Adult-Gerontology Acute Care
Nurse Practitioner specialization

This course challenges the nurse practitioner student to apply previously obtained advance assessment techniques to
technologically derived data to differentiate conditions in acutely ill patients. Interpretation of relevant data, radiographs,
and electrocardiographs will be presented. Condition treatment plans will be discussed in relation to available acute care
settings. Laboratory practice will occur and include procedures commonly encountered in the acute setting.
The student who does NOT meet the clinical requirements will receive a failing grade in this course regardless of the
course work evaluation scores.
25 clinical hours

END

NURS 05519:

AGACNP I: Evidence Based Clinical Care for Adult Gerontological Acute Care
Nurse Practitioner

Prerequisites: NURS 05518

This course introduces the AGACNP student to key concepts in the management of acutely ill individuals across the adult
lifespan. All information is presented via case study format. The graduate student will apply evidence based practice, and
diagnostic reasoning when developing the treatment plan. The need to organize advanced assessment, diganostic
interventions, and caring practices will be illuminated. Disease specific conditions are presented with a focus on
pathophysiology and advanced therapeutics. This is the first of three clinical practice courses. Successful course completion
is defined as success in both the didactic and clinical portions of the course.
The student who does NOT meet the clinical requirements will receive a failing grade in this course regardless of the
course work evaluation scores.

END

NURS 05520:

AGACNP II: Evidence Based Clinical Care for Adult Gerontological Acute Care
Nurse Practitioner

Prerequisites: NURS 05519

This course investigates medical conditions encounterd by the acutely ill adult across the lifespan. Special consideration is
given to medically challenging cases and mental health disorders. The AGACNP student will analyze data and develop
evidence based treatment plans. The challenges to perform in a collaborative environment and partner with patients,
families and communities will be discussed. Topics for future nurse practitioner researcher will be discussed. The student
will be submersed in clinical practice with an experienced preceptor.
The student who does NOT meet the clinical requirements will receive a failing grade in this course regardless of the
course work evaluation scores.

END

NURS 05521:

AGACNP III: Evidence Based Clinical Care for Adult Gerontological Acute Care
Nurse Practitioner

Prerequisites: NURS 05520

This course investigates surgical conditions encountered by the acutely ill adult across the lifespan. Special consideration is
given to challenging cases and traumatic injuries. The AGACNP student will analyze data and develop evidence based
treatment plans. The ethical dilemmas presented by acute injury and advanced age will be discussed. Reimbursement and
quality improvement initiatives will be presented. Topics for future nurse practitioner researcher will be discussed. The
student will be submersed in clinical practice with a experienced preceptor.
The student who does NOT meet the clinical requirements will receive a failing grade in this course regardless of the
course work evaluation scores.

END

NURS 05522:

Family Nurse Practitioner I: Primary Care of the Adult Patient and Older Adult
Patient

Prerequisites: Completion of the core MSN courses with a GPA of 3.0 or higher and admission into the Family Nurse Practitioner specialization

This course focuses on the role of the APN in the primary care of the adult and older adult. Utilizing lectures, assigned
readings, and case studies the advanced practice student will incorporate advance assessment skill to formulate differential
diagnoses of a variety of acute and chronic conditions that inflict the adult and older adult client. Conditions discussed in
this course focuses on the Skin, Head, Eyes, Ears, Nose and Throat, Heart and Lungs. Clinical judgment skills will be
developed to select proper pharmacological and non-pharmacological therapies of management. Concentration of the
aspects of health promotion and disease prevention will be highlighted. Clinical portion will emphasize didactic
components of the course and apply them to episodic and chronic problems of the adult and older adult.
100 clinical hours

END

NURS 05523:

Family Nurse Practitioner II: Primary Care Management of the Adult Patient and
Older Adult Patient

Prerequisites: NURS 05522

This course focuses on the role of the APN in the primary care of the adult and older adult. Utilizing lectures, assigned
readings, and case studies the advanced practice student will incorporate advance assessment skills to formulate differential
diagnoses of variety of acute and chronic conditions that inflict the adult and older adult client. Conditions discussed in this
course will address the gastrointestinal, hepatobiliary, neurology, renal and urinary, and reporductive systems. Issues of
Mental Health such as anxiety, depression, bipolar, eating and substance abuse will also be brought into focus. Clinical
judgment skills will be developed to select proper pharmacological and non-pharmacological therapies in the management of
these conditions. Concentration of the aspects of health promotion and disease prevention will be highlighted. Clinical
portion will emphasize didactic components of the course and apply them to episodic and chronic problems of the adult and
older adult.

END

NURS 05524:

Family Nurse Practitioner III: Primary Care Management of the Female Patient

Prerequisites: NURS 05523

The course build upon the current knowledge from primary care management of the adult and older adult I and II and
extending its focus to the issue of women's health issues. Using lecture, assigned readings and case studies, the didactic
compnent of this course will focus on episodic and chronic disease facing woman from diverse populations from menarche
throughout the postmenopausal stage. Care management concepts of the pregnant client will also be introduced. Course
content will also reflect prescribing practices in relation to the pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics that can affect
pregnant and lactating women. Clinical hours will reinforce the didactic element of the class incorporating skills of
assessment, differential diagnosis, and evidence base practice to provide optimal obsterical and gynecological care of the
female client.

END

NURS 05525:

Family Nurse Practitioner IV: Primary Care Management of Children and
Adolescents

Prerequisites: NURS 05524

This course focuses on the primary care of the infant, child and adolescent population. Developmental and culturally
competent health assessment is a key component of the course. Utilizing these skills the advanced practice student will
learn thru lecture, assigned readings and case studies how to develop differential diagnoses in order to plan, implement and
manage common acute and chronic health problems of the pediatric/adolescent client. Clinical hours will reinforce the
didactic component of the class in addition to concentrating on evidence based practice to address the needs of this
population.

END

NURS 05526:

Family Nurse Practitioner V: Practicum in Family Practice

Prerequisites: NURS 05525

This is a clinical immersion practicum that is a culmination of the learning experience for the family nurse practitioner
student. Its purpose is to allow the students the opportunity to provide comprehensive health care to diverse clients across
the lifespan. Successful completion will entail the ability for the student to completely demonstrate the use of theory,
evidence-based practice in assessing, diagnosing, and treating clients. Students will be able to provide cost-effective and safe
family based care integrating concepts of health promotion and disease prevention. Monthy meetings with assign faculty
will occur within this clinically focused course to identify problems and answer relevant questions.

END

NURS 05527:

Adv Dev, Hlth Asmt, Wellness, Hlth Promotion & Disease Prvntn of the Infant,
Child, and Adolescent

Prerequisites: Admission into Acute Care Pediatric Nurse Practitioner Specialty and 100 Clinical Hours

This course focuses on the role of the Acute Care in the health assessment, advanced development, wellness, health
promotion and disease prevention of the infant, child and the adolescent. Utilizing lectures, assigned readings, laboratory
expereinced, clinical solutions and case studies the advanced practice pediatric student will utilize advance assessment skills
to promote health and wellness in the infant, child and adolescent. This course will focus on the health assessment of
infant's, children and adolescent. Disease prevention will be a focus to promote optimal health in the infant, child and
adolescent. The clinical component will integrate concepts discussed in the class and apply them to the patient population
in welll baby and pediatric situations.

END

NURS 05528:

Advanced Chronic Care of the Infant, Child and Adolescent in the Health Care
System

Prerequisites: NURS 05527 and 150 Clinical Hours

This course focuses on the role of the Acute Care Pediatric Nurse Practitioner in the care of the infant child and
adolescent in the health care system with chronic conditions. Chronic health conditions will be reviwed in relation to each
body system. The pharmacological interventions for each condition will be explored and evaluated. Utilizing lectures,
assigned readings, laboratory experiences, clinincal situations and case studies the advanced practice pediatric student will
implement evidenced based practice to care for the infant, child and the adolescent with chronic health care deviations. The
clinical component will integrate concepts discussed in class and apply them to the patient population.

END

NURS 05529:

Advanced Acute Care of the Infant, Child and Adolescent in the Health Care
System

Prerequisites: NURS 05528 and 150 Clinical Hours

This course focuses on the role of the Acute Care Pediatric nurse practitioner in the care of the infant, child and
adolescent in the treatment of acute health care deviations. Acute health conditions will be reviewed in the relation to each
body system. The pharmacological interventions for each condition will be explored and evaluated. Course content relates
to the acute health care problems in infants, children and adolescent and their impact on the family. Incorporating
evidenced based research, a family-centered perspective, care is provided which includes psychosocial factors, and ethical
considerations. Utilizing lectures, assigned readings, laboratory experiences, clinical situations and case studies the pediatric
nurse practitioner will prescribe and provide care based on outcomes. The clinical component will integrate concepts
discussed in class and apply them to the patient population in well baby and pediatric situations.

END

NURS 05530:

Advanced Clinical Care for the infant, child and adolescent in the community and medical home

Prerequisites: NURS 05529 200 Clinical hours The student who does NOT meet the clinical requirements will receive a failing grade
in this course regardless of the course work evaluation scores.

This course focues on the care provided to the infant, child and adolescent in the community and medical home. THis
course provides the Acute Care Pediatric nurse practitioner with the ability to synthesize and integrate the knowledge,
skills, and attitudes important to providing care for infant, child, and adolescent and the community in which they live. The
course emphasizes the importance of a holistic perspective and an understanding of the client and family as individuals with
diverse spiritual and cultural needs and expectations and as a member of the community. Synthesis and analysis of previously
learned concepts will provide the student with the opportunities to recognize their own feelings, needs, and issues regarding
care, and issues pertaining to end of life while addressing the multicultural needs of the infant, child and adolescent while
addressing health care disparities. Content includes societal, physical, psychological, ethical, and spiritual aspects of life and
death. The pharmacological interventions will be explored and evaluated individually. Course content relates to the health
care problems in infants, children and adolescent and their impact on the community. Incorporating evidenced based
research, a family-centered perspective, care is provided which includes psychosocial factors, and ethical considerations.
Utilizing lectures, assigned readings, laboratory experiences, clinical situations and case studies the Acute Care Pediatric
nurse practitioner will prescribe and provide care based outcomes.

END

NURS 05531:

FNP ACROSS THE LIFESPAN

Prerequisites: NURS 05504 and NURS 05505 and NURS 05503 and NURS 05501 and AHI 05501 and NURS 05507 and NURS
05508 and NURS 05538 and NURS 05545 and and NURS 05546 and NURS 05544

Nurse Practitioners must possess advanced knowledge and skill to deal with complex issues. This course focuses on the
integration of assessment findings with differential diagnoses, appropriate diagnostics and treatments based upon evidence
in practice. A special focus on health screenings, head, eyes, ears, nose and throat disorders, endocrinology, cardiac
disorders, dermatology, musculoskeletal and hepatic disorders is investigated in young adults, middle aged adults, and older
adults.

END

NURS 05532:

FNP Across the Lifespan

Prerequisites: NURS 05504 and NURS 05505 and NURS 05503 and NURS 05501 and AHI 05501 and NURS 05507 and NURS
05508 NURS 05538 and NURS 05545 and NURS 05546 and NURS 05544

Nurse Practitioners must possess advanced knowledge and skill to deal with complex issues. This course focuses on the
integration of assessment findings with differential diagnoses, appropriate diagnostics and treatments based upon evidence
in practice. A special focus on health screenings, head, eyes, ears, nose and throat disorders, endocrinology, cardiac
disorders, dermatology, musculoskeletal and hepatic disorders is investigated in young adults, middle aged adults, and older
adults.

END

NURS 05533:

AGACNP Adult Medicine Clinical I

Prerequisites: NURS 05504 and NURS 05505 and NURS 05503 and NURS 05501 and AHI 05501 and NURS 05507 and NURS
05508

The focus of this course is integration of the Adult-Gerontologic Acute Care Nurse Practitioner (AGACNP) core
knowledge in health promotion and diagnosis and management in the care of the mature and aging patient in the acute care
setting. Emphasis is placed on the care of mature and aging patients and families with acute and chronic complex health
problems. In addition, the Adult-Gerontologic Nurse Practitioner as a collaborative member of the interprofessional team
will be emphasized. This course requires 200 clinical hours.

END

NURS 05534:

Evidence Based Clinical Care for Adult Gerontologic Acute Care Nurse
Practitioner I

Prerequisites: NURS 05504 and NURS 05505 and NURS 05503 and NURS 05501 and AHI 05501 and NURS 05507 and NURS
05508 and NURS 05527 and NURS 05533

Nurse Practitioners must possess advanced knowledge and skill to deal with complex issues. This course focuses on the
integration of assessment findings with differential diagnoses, appropriate diagnostics and treatments based upon evidence
in practice. A special focus on cardiac, toxic exposure, sepsis, pain, oncology, fluid and electrolyte imbalances, endocrine,
musculoskeletal, and gastrointestinal disorders is investigated in young adults, middle aged adults, and older adults.

END

NURS 05535:

AGACNP ADULT MEDICIN CLINCL II

Prerequisites: NURS 05504 and NURS 05505 and NURS 05503 and NURS 05501and AHI 05501 and NURS 05507 and NURS
05508 and NURS 05527 and NURS 05533

The focus of this course is integration of the Adult-Gerontologic Acute Care Nurse Practitioner (AGACNP) core
knowledge in health promotion and diagnosis and management in the care of the mature and aging patient in the acute care
setting. Emphasis is placed on the care of mature and aging patients and families with acute and chronic complex health
problems. In addition, the Adult-Gerontologic Nurse Practitioner as a collaborative member of the interprofessional team
will be emphasized. This course requires 200 clinical hours.

END

NURS 05536:

Evidence Based Clinical Care for Adult Gerontological Acute Care Nurse
Practitioner II

Prerequisites: NURS 05504 and NURS 05505 and NURS 05503 and NURS 05501 and AHI 05501 and NURS 05507 and NURS
05508 and NURS 05527 and NURS 05533 and NURS 05534 and NURS 05535

Nurse Practitioners must possess advanced knowledge and skill to deal with complex issues. This course focuses on the
integration of assessment findings with differential diagnoses, appropriate diagnostics and treatments based upon evidence
in practice. A special focus on complex disease from the head to toe with critical illness is represented. These life
threatening disorders are investigated in young adults, middle aged adults and older adults.

END

NURS 05537:

AGACNP Adult Medicine Clinical III

Prerequisites: NURS 05504 and NURS 05505 and NURS 05503 and NURS 05501 and AHI 05501 and NURS 05507 and NURS
05508 and NURS 05516 and NURS 05517 and NURS 05527 and NURS 05533 and NURS 05534 and NURS 05535

This course develops clinical competency and emphasizes the integration of theory, assessment and advanced therapeutics
for young adults, and adults and older adults in a high acuity setting. Students will perform comprehensive clinical
assessments including appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic testing. Management of acute and chronic health problems
will be under the direction of clinical preceptors. Clinical placements will include a variety of acute/critical care areas
including but not limited to: emergency department, medical/surgical intensive care units, intermediate care and specialty
services such as transplant and oncology. Gerontology experiences will be provided in long term care, rehabilitation facilities
and the acute care setting. In addition, this course emphasizes collaborative partnership development between patients,
their families, and inter-professional teams. This course requires 200 clinical hours.

END

NURS 05538:

Adult Acute and Chronic Disease Management

Prerequisites: NURS 05504 and NURS 05505 and NURS 05503 and NURS 05501 and AHI 05501 and NURS 05508

Nurse Practitioners must possess advanced knowledge and skill to deal with complex issues. This course focuses on the
integration of assessment findings with differential diagnoses, appropriate diagnostics and treatments based upon evidence
in practice. Conditions discussed in this course include mental illness, neurologic, renal, pulmonary, vascular, endocrine, and
gastrointestinal disorders in young adults, middle aged adults, and older adults.

END

NURS 05539:

Screening of Women throughout the Lifespan & Health Promotion: Genetics,
Diagnostics & Interventions

Prerequisites: Completion of the core MSN courses with a GPA of 3.0 or higher and admission into the Women's Health Nurse Practitioner specialization. (50 Clinical hours) The student 
who does NOT meet the clinical requirements will receive a failing grade in this course regardless of the course work evaluation scores.

This course focuses on the role of Women's Health Nurse Practitioner in the health assessment, advanced development
wellness, health promotion and disease prevention of the female patient throughout the lifespan in health, pregnancy,
post-partum, and acute/chronic illness. Utilizing lectures, assigned readings, laboratory experiences, clinical practicum and
case studies the advanced practice will utilize advance assessment skills to promote health and wellness of the female across
the lifespan. The clinical component will integrate and apply concepts to the female patient population. Through active
clinical learning the student will apply newly acquired knowledge.

END

NURS 05540:

Primary Care for the Women's Health Nurse

Prerequisites: NURS 05539 100 Clinical hours The student who does NOT meet the clinical requirements wil receive a failing grade in this course regardless of the course work evaluation scores.

The course builds upon the current knowledge from screening of women throughout the lifespan and health promotion.
Students perform comprehensive assessment of the female client to determine normal, benign variants and disease
processes. Based upon assessment plans are formulated and prioritized by differential diagnosis. The student applies
knowledge in the clinical setting and demonstrates the ability to deliver effective primary care to females. This care is
evidenced based, culturally sensitive, and includes health promotion and disease management.

END

NURS 05541:

Evidence Based Practice for Women's Health and Gynecological Issues Across the
Lifespan

Prerequisites: NURS 05540 200 Clinical hours The student who does NOT meet the clinical requirement will receive a failing grade in this course regardless of the course work evaluation scores.

This course focuses on the role of the Women's Health Nurse Practitioner in providing evidence based care to women
expereincing gynecological issues across the lifespan. Utilizing lectures, assinged readings, laboratory experiences, clinical
practicum and case studies the advanced practice student will utilize advance assessment skills to promote health and
wellness of the female across the lifespan. This course will focus on the health assessment of the female across the lifespan.
The clinical component will integrate and apply concepts to the female patient population. Through active clinical learning
the student will apply newly acquired knowledge.

END

NURS 05542:

Evidence Based Practice for Women's Health/Obstetrics: The Pregnant Woman,
Fetus, Neonate and Family

Prerequisites: NURS 05541 200 Clinical hours The student who does NOT meet the clinical requirements will receive a failing grade
in this course regardless of the course work evaluation scores.

This course focuses on the role of the Women's Health Nurse Practitioner in providing evidence based care to women
experiencing pregnancy. Utilizing lectures, assigned readings, laboratory experiences, clinical practicm and case studies that
advanced practice student will utilize advance assessment skills to promote health and wellness of the pregnant female. The
clinical component will integrate and apply concepts to the female patient population. Through active clinical learning the
student will apply newly acquired knowledge.

END

NURS 05543:

Evidence Based Practice Clinical Course

Prerequisites: NURS 05503 and NURS 05510 40 Clinical hours and Clinical project

Evidence-based practice in illness and disease management is a requirement for quality care delivery. This course supports
the student through the development, implementation, and evaluation of an evidence-based practice project in the clinical
setting. This course requires successful completion of 40 clinical hours and a clinical project.

END

NURS 05544:

FNP Women's Health/Pediatrics Clinical

Prerequisites: NURS 05504 and NURS 05505 and NURS 05503 and NURS 05501 and AHI 05501 and NURS 05507 and NURS 05508 and NURS 05538 and NURS 05545

The focus of this course is integration of the Family Nurse Practitioner’s (FNP) core knowledge in health promotion and
diagnosis and management in the care of the female and pediatric patient in the primary healthcare setting. Emphasis is
placed on the care of female and pediatric patients with acute and chronic complex health problems. In addition, the family
nurse practitioner as a collaborative member of the interprofessional team will be emphasized. This course requires 200
clinical hours.

END

NURS 05545:

FNP Clinical I

Prerequisites: NURS 05504 and NURS 05505 and NURS 05503 and NURS 05501 and AHI 05501 and NURS 05507 and NURS 05508

The focus of this course is integration of the Family Nurse Practitioner’s (FNP) core knowledge in health promotion and
diagnosis and management in the care of the mature and aging patient and families in the primary healthcare setting.
Emphasis is placed on the care of a mature and aging patients and families with acute and chronic complex health problems.
In addition, the family nurse practitioner as a collaborative member of the interprofessional team will be emphasized. This
course requires 200 clinical hours.

END

NURS 05546:

Women's Health and Pediatrics

Prerequisites: NURS 05504 and NURS 05505 and NURS 05503 and NURS 05501 and AHI 05501 and NURS 05507 and NURS 05508 and NURS 05538 and NURS 05545

Nurse Practitioners must possess advanced knowledge and skill to deal with complex issues. This course focuses on the
integration of assessment findings with differential diagnoses, appropriate diagnostics and treatments based upon evidence
in practice. A special focus on the female and pediatric patient.

END

NURS 05547:

FNP Clinical II

Prerequisites: NURS 05504 and NURS 05505 and NURS 05503 and NURS 05501 and AHI 05501 and NURS 05507 and NURS 05508 and NURS 05538 and NURS 05545 and NURS 05546 and NURS 05544

The focus of this course is integration of the Family Nurse Practitioner’s (FNP) core knowledge in health promotion and
diagnosis and management in the care of the mature and aging patient and families in the primary healthcare setting.
Emphasis is placed on the care of mature and aging patients and families with acute and chronic complex health problems.
In addition, the family nurse practitioner as a collaborative member of the interprofessional team will be emphasized. This
course requires 200 clinical hours.

END

NURS 05551:

Theoretical Foundations of Psychotherapy Across the Lifespan

Prerequisites: Completion of an accredited Master of Science in Nursing (MSN) program or both NURS 05504 and NURS 05505

This course is designed to provide a theoretical foundation to working with high risk individuals, families, and groups
across the lifespan. Students retrieve and analyze the best available evidence to guide the development, implementation, and
evaluation of individual, group, and family therapy. This course is designed to synthesize advanced practice psychiatric
mental health knowledge related to cultural, legal, ethical and moral issues across the lifespan.

END

NURS 05552:

Biopsychosocial Assessment & Differential Diagnosis

Prerequisites: Completion of an Accredited Master of Science in Nuring (MSN) or NURS 05504

This course will examine the advanced concepts of assessment, psychopathology, and differential diagnosis in advanced
practice psychiatric-mental health nursing. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (5th edition) will be utilized to formulate
diagnoses and treatment formulations for psychiatric patients across the lifespan. The course will review the components
and use of the comprehensive psychiatric evaluation as means to gather clinical data and information during a psychiatric
interview. Various theoretical perspectives about the etiology of common psychiatric disorders will be reviewed. Factorsrelated to epidemiology, genetics, gender, cultural, and ethnicity of psychiatric disorders across the lifespan will be analyzed.
A strong emphasis is placed on proper assessment and identification of discrete aspects of cognition, affect and behavior in
the diagnosis and treatment planning of psychiatric illness.

END

NURS 05553:

Principles of Psycopharmacology Across the Lifespan

Prerequisites: Completion of an Accredited Master of Science (MSN) Progam or (NURS 05504 and NURS 05505)

This course introduces students to the effects and mechanisms of action of psychoactive drugs. Drugs used in the
treatment of psychopathological disorders and drugs of abuse are analyzed. Implications for drug administration are
discussed across the lifespan.

END

NURS 05554:

Behavior Theory I: Care of the Adult and the Older Adult and Family

Prerequisites: NURS 05553 and NURS 05552 and NURS 05551 or (NURS 05500 AND NURS 05501 NURS 05503 and NURS 05504
and NURS 05505 and NURS 05507 and NURS 05508 and NURS 05551 and NURS 05552 and NURS 05553)

This course will focus on synthesized advanced practice knowledge relevant to the multidimensional assessment and
interventions processes of the adult and older adult and their family. The examination of theoretical models, evidenced
based practice and research findings pertinent to neuroscience, psychopharmacology and psychotherapeutic/psychosocial
interventions is evaluated for best evidence-based practices. Students will examine clinical therapeutics, life style
modification and complementary therapies as part of their clinical decision making. Knowledge needed for mental health
assessment, differential diagnosis, and interventions with culturally diverse individuals is addressed. Diverse psychiatric
settings and their patient population dynamics, including presenting psychiatric and medical symptoms and interventions,
will be analyzed as part of the advanced practice role.

END

NURS 05555:

Behavior Clinical Practium I: Care of the Adult and the Older Adult and Family

Prerequisites: NURS 05553 and NURS 05552 and NURS 05551 or (NURS 05500 and NURS 05501 and NURS 05503 and NURS
05504 and NURS 05505 and NURS 05507 and NURS 05508 and NURS 05551 and NURS 05552 and NURS 05553)

This course will provide the student with an opportunity to evaluate and apply evidenced-based approaches of health
promotion, diagnosis and management of psychiatric illness. Theoretical based treatment strategies based on
evidence-­based research will be analyzed and applied to clinical case studies. Theoretical models and research findings
pertinent to neuroscience, psychopharmacology and Psychotherapy will be examined regarding care of adults and older
adults and their families. Interventions for the care of adults and older adults and their family will be evaluated. A review of
evidence-based knowledge needed for assessing, diagnosing, and treatment planning among adults and older adults and their
family systems from culturally diverse backgrounds are addressed. Implications of ethical, legal issues, and health policy
relative to advanced practice psychiatric nursing in the care and treatment of adults and older adults will be reviewed.
Clinical supervision is a component of this course and requires a minimum of 2 hours per week. This course has intensive
supervision with instructor and student on a 1:1 biases to review therapeutic modalities in the clinical setting on a weekly
biases. This intensive supervision is required in psychiatric and mental health practicums due to the vulnerability of the
population.

END

NURS 05556:

Behavior Theory II: Care of the Adult and the Older Adult and Family

Prerequisites: NURS 05554

This course will focus on the multidimensional biopsychosocial management of adults and older adults within the
framework of the family. The examination of theoretical models and evidenced-based research findings pertinent to
neuroscience, psychopharmacology and psychotherapeutic/psychosocial interventions of adults and their families is
evaluated for best evidence-based practices. Students will examine the adult and aging process as it relates to symptom
development and treatment strategies. Crisis theory, psychological trauma, personality disorders, dementia, and substance
use assessment and treatment will be highlighted across the adult and aging process. Legal and ethical implications of
treatment for adults and the older adult will be incorporated in the advanced practice role.

END

NURS 05557:

Behavior Clinical Practicum II: Care of the Adult and the Older Adult and Family

Prerequisites: NURS 05555

This practicum is designed to synthesize advanced practice knowledge relevant to persons with psychiatric illness and their
families. Treatment models and evidenced-based research findings related to the interventions through the adult life span
will be considered in the clinical settings. Acute and chronic mental health changes will be evaluated relative to crisis and
grief, anxiety, personality, sleep, addictions, sexual disorders, psychological trauma, dementias and co-occurring medical
issues. Endocrine, metabolic, and toxic states are explored in the formulation of differential diagnosis and implications for
advanced practice. Clinical practicums will focus on the incorporation of advanced skills related to conducting psychiatric
evaluations; determining differential diagnoses; developing clinical case formulations and treatment plans; delivering
evidenced-based supportive, brief, and short-term individual, group and family psychotherapy; identifying and evaluating
psychopharmacological agents; and implementing outcome measures with adults and older adults and their families. Clinical
supervision is a minimum of 2 hours weekly and a required component of this course. This course has intensive supervision
with instructor and student on a 1:1 biases to review therapeutic modalities in the clinical setting on a weekly biases. This
intensive supervision is required in psychiatric and mental health practicums due to the vulnerability of the population.

END

NURS 05558:

Behavior Theory III: Care of the Child and Adolescent and Family

Prerequisites: NURS 05556

This course will provide the student with an opportunity to evaluate and apply evidenced-based approaches for health
promotion, diagnosis and management of psychiatric illness in the care of children and adolescents and their families.
Theoretically based treatment strategies based on evidenced based research will be analyzed and applied to clinical case studies. 
Theoretical models and research findings pertinent to neuroscience, psychopharmacology and psychotherapeutic/psychosocial 
interventions of children and adolescents and their family will be evaluated. A review of evidence-based knowledge needed for assessing, 
diagnosing, and treatment planning among children, adolescents and their family systems from culturally diverse backgrounds is addressed. 
Implications of ethical, legal issues, and health policy relative advanced practice psychiatric nursing in the care and treatment of children and adolescent will be reviewed.

END

NURS 05559:

Behavior Clinical Practicum III: Care of the Child and Adolescent and Family

Prerequisites: NURS 05557

This practicum is designed to synthesize advanced practice knowledge relevant to children and adolescents and their
families with psychiatric illness. Treatment models and evidence-based research findings related to the primary, secondary
and tertiary care through the childhood life span will be considered in the clinical settings. Acute and chronic mental health
changes will be evaluated relative to growth and development, neurodevelopmental disorders, psychotic, mood and anxiety
problems, elimination, feeding and eating problems, sleep, gender, disruptive problem, addictions, psychological trauma,
and co­-occurring medical issues. Endocrine, metabolic, and toxic states are explored in the formulation of differential
diagnosis and implications for advanced practice. Clinical practicums will focus on the incorporation of advanced skills
related to conducting psychiatric evaluations; determining differential diagnoses; developing clinical case formulations and
treatment plans; delivering evidenced- based supportive, brief, and short-term individual, group and family psychotherapy;
identifying and evaluating psychopharmacological agents; and implementing outcome measures with children and
adolescents and their families. Legal and ethical issues related to treatment will be applied in the clinical settings. Clinical
supervision is a component of this course and requires a minimum of 2 hour per week. This course has intensive supervision
with instructor and student on a 1:1 biases to review therapeutic modalities in the clinical setting on a weekly biases. This
intensive supervision is required in psychiatric and mental health practicums due to the vulnerability of the population.

END

NURS 05560:

Evidence Based Practice In Illness/Disease

Prerequisites: NURS 05516 and NURS 05517

This course examines how national health issues impact health care organizations, explores transitional care for successful
care delivery and coordination, evaluates population groups facing challenges to health care access, and compares and
contrasts functional components of U.S. health care with other countries in the world.

END

NURS 05561:

The Role of the Nurse-Theory and Practice

Prerequisites: NURS 05507, NURS 05508, NURS 05500,NURS 05503, NURS 05509

This course explores the tools and theoretical concepts to develop leadership skills of the nurse executive. The content of
the course addresses the challenges facing today’s leader in health care systems and considers the need for leaders who can
transform these challenges into opportunities. Evidence-based decision-making strategies are discussed related to patient
safety, practice excellence, and leading teams. The role of the nurse executive as it relates to the significance of power and
influence through care delivery models is also presented.

END

NURS 05562:

Healthcare Organizational Structure

Prerequisites: NURS 05507 and NURS 05508 and NURS 05500 NURS 05503 and NURS 05560 and NURS 05561

The course explores the tools and theoretical concepts to guide management of operations in healthcare organizations.
The content of the course addresses how Six Sigma and Lean Management quality improvement methodologies work to
improve health outcomes. There is an overview and history of organizational behavior as it applies to health care
management. The course also details strategies such as cultural intelligence among others that are needed by healthcare
organizations to handle the needs of an increasingly diverse patient population.

END

NURS 05563:

Philosophy and Ethics in Advanced Nursing Roles

Prerequisites: NURS 05507, 05508, 05500, 05503, 05560, 05561, and 05562

This course explores the complex and challenging personal, interpersonal, professional, institutional, social, and global
issues associated with healthcare leadership. Placing nursing within its historical context, there is an exploration of
contemporary issues allowing for processing to develop the skills to manage ethical problems.

END

NURS 05564:

Healthcare Economics for Nursing Executives

Prerequisites: NURS 05500, NURS 05503, NURS 05507, and NURS 05508

This course explores the tools and theoretical concepts to develop financial management skills of the nurse executive.
Evidence-based decision-making strategies are discussed related to healthcare revenue sources, budget variances, and the
management of financing costs. The role of the nurse executive as it relates to direct and indirect costs in addition to capital
budgeting is also explored.

END

NURS 05565:

Nurse Executive & Human Capital Issues

Prerequisites: NURS 05500, NURS 05503, NURS 05507, and NURS 05508

This course explores the tools and theoretical concepts of human capital management for the nurse executive in the
current healthcare environment. The content addresses the core activities of a human resource (HR) department, provides a
macro view of human capital issues, and reviews the relevant laws that shape and define many of the services organizations
are expected to provide. The role and responsibilities of the nurse executive as it relates to compensation and benefits,
recruitment and retention of highly qualified and engaged employees, social media influences, performance appraisals, and
relations with labor unions is also covered.

END

PHIL 09110:

The Logic Of Everyday Reasoning

This course in informal logic aims at improving the student's reasoning through a thorough exposure to common logical
fallacies as these appear in ordinary language, and through a study of rational procedures for problem-solving. Students have
opportunities for extensive practice at discovering and overcoming their own logical faults in writing and speech as well as
practice at rational problem-solving.

END

PHIL 09120:

Introduction To Philosophy

This basic course in the methods of philosophical inquiry investigates how these methods have been applied to selected
philosophical issues by classical and contemporary philosophers.

END

PHIL 09130:

Introduction to Symbolic Logic

This course provides students with a working familiarity with the principles and procedures involved in deductive logic.

END

PHIL 09150:

Introduction to Ethics

This historically structured course emphasizes both the nature of moral problems and the variety and adequacy of selected
moral theories. The course involves reflection and analysis of classic and contemporary theories and thinkers. This course
carries a mutual exclusion with the following courses; you may not enroll in it if you have completed any of the following
with a passing grade: PHIL 09151

END

PHIL 09241:

Social and Political Philosophy - WI

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This is an introduction to the broad themes of political philosophy and social theory: How human life is and should be
organized into societies; the nature of political systems and different forms of government; the relationship between the
individual and the state; the nature of justice; the influence of economy on society; how human nature influences social
nature; and the meanings of freedom, equality, and democracy. Meets Rowan Core writing intensive guidelines with a
variety of graded and ungraded writing assignments and papers.

END

PHIL 09310:

Aesthetics

Prerequisites: At least one PHIL course, or more than one Arts course (ART, ARHS, MUS, MUSG, THD, RTF).

This course offers students an approach to such philosophical issues as the nature; the role of the arts in human culture;
and the articulation of criteria for interpretation and criticism. Students will refine their own approach to these issues by
attending to specific works of poetry, fiction, drama, music, painting, sculpture, and other arts, including student works.

END

PHIL 09328:

Philosophy And Gender

Prerequisites: At least one PHIL course or PHRE course or INTR 01130

This course will explore philosophical issues relating to gender as considered by classical, modern and contemporary
philosophers. Recent work by feminist philosophers will be emphasized.

END

PHIL 09370:

Epistemology

Prerequisites: At least one course in PHIL or PHRE

This course addresses philosophical questions concerning the nature of knowledge. Some of these questions include: How
can we be sure that our knowledge of the world is accurate? What is the relation of evidence to our understanding of the
world? What distinguishes mathematical knowledge from scientific and ethical knowledge? Students will study and criticize
both traditional and contemporary approaches to the understanding of knowledge. Students will also develop and refine
their own views in response to these issues.

END

PHIL 09521:

Philosophical Approaches to Diversity, Equity, and Identity

Prerequisites: Enrollment in MA or COGS in Diversity and Inclusion

This course covers philosophical issues arising in relation to institutional, social, and cultural diversity. Topics to be
addressed may include ontological and epistemic questions arising in relation to socio-cultural identity and difference, as
well as ethical / socio-political philosophical approaches to recognition of, rights and duties to others and distributive,
restorative and reparative justice.

END

PHIL 09531:

Applied Ethics

This course covers classic and contemporary issues in applied ethics. Topics to be addressed may include multiculturalism,
globalization, sexual harassment, affirmative action and diversity issues in employment, social responsibility and justice,
social media ethics, professional ethics, and other topics. Students will apply ethical theories and principles to contemporary
ethical dilemmas and issues.

END

REL 10100:

World Religions

This course surveys the major world religions in both the Eastern and Western traditions. The course replaces REL 10200
RELIGIONS OF THE WORLD. It is not permitted to earn credit in both.

END

REL 10210:

Religion In America

This course explores the wide variety of religious movements that have existed and continue to exist in America. Both
traditional religions and cults are considered within the context of American culture.

END

ASTR 11520:

Selected Topics in Space Science

This course will provide an in-depth study of topics covering stars, planets, the solar system, galaxies and the universe as a
whole. It will focus on the scientific evidence for our understanding as well as the application of the laws of physics
controlling them. This course is meant to prepare middle school teachers to cover space science topics required by the K–8
NJ Core Curriculum Science Standards.

END

ASTR 17520:

Selected Topics In Earth Science

This course will provide an in-depth study of topics covering the properties of the Earth including its surface, water, and
atmosphere. It will focus on the forces and processes that shape and control change to these systems. This course is meant
to prepare middle school teachers to cover earth science topics required by the K–8 NJ Core Curriculum Science Standards.

END

MSE 00510:

Structure, Symmetry, and Properties of Materials

This course focuses on the interplay between the structural and physical properties of materials. It covers a wide range of
materials including inorganic phases, polymers and biomaterials. Discussion begins with how chemical bonding leads to
varying symmetry in the structure and leads to how the local symmetry determines the physical properties. Finally, the
course describes how the physical properties can be modulated by the synthesis and processing.

END

MSE 00520:

Thermodynamics of Materials

This course will enable students to appropriately apply engineering, chemical, and statistical thermodynamics to solve
problems, to use thermodynamics to predict and interpret phase equilibria and stability in unary and multicomponent
systems, to describe liquid and solid solution behavior using solution thermodynamics, to describe thermal behavior of
condensed matter including phase transitions and order-disorder transformations, and to analytically examine adsorption
processes using surface thermodynamics. Students will learn to use thermochemical calculation software, and the principles
behind how these software operate. This course will use a combination of lectures, in-class discussions, problem-based
learning, and project-based learning experiences to provide students with a strong foundation in thermodynamics of
materials. The learning goals listed above contribute to the program goals that the Ph.D. Program in Materials Science and
Engineering (MSE) has set forth for its graduate students.

END

MSE 00530:

Experimental Techniques in Materials Science and Engineering

Prerequisite: Graduate standing or approval by instructor

Experimental techniques used for synthesis and characterization of various materials will be covered in this course.
Hands-on training will be available using several lab tools including x-ray diffraction system, optical interferometer, scanning
electron microscopy, energy dispersive spectroscopy, and others. Particle diffraction and its use will be described and
demonstrated. Thin film deposition techniques will be discussed. This course is required for students in the MSE PhD
program.

END

MSE 00598:

Master's Thesis Research Continuation

Prerequisites: MSE 00599

Continuation of supervised research leading to an M.S. thesis in MSE. This course may be repeated.

END

MSE 00599:

Master's Thesis Research

This is a research course designed to provide necessary time, guidance, and support for the student to work on meaningful
research towards the M.S. degree. The course highlights the research activities, research outcomes, innovations, and key
contributions to the field of Materials Science and Engineering from a M.S. student. The course will provide a meaningful
one-on-one research experience, under the direction of a faculty advisor. Each section of this course will be associated with a
faculty member. Each M.S. student will take the particular section from his/her advisor, who will be guiding the student’s
M.S. thesis research. This course may be repeated for a maximum of 9 credits.

END

MSE 00610:

Kinetics of Materials

Prerequisites: MSE 00520 or Permission of Instructor

This is a graduate level course designed to teach students how materials assemble into their observed structures. Materials
(solids and liquids), biomaterials, and amorphous solids are governed by principles of kinetics for diffusion, nucleation and
growth, and adatom addition to atomic-scale structures at surfaces and interfaces. This course will enable students to use
kinetics equations and principles to predict materials structure formation in different processes. This course will use a
combination of lectures, in-class discussions, problem-based learning, and project-based learning experiences to provide
students with a strong foundation in the kinetics of materials. The learning goals listed above contribute to the program
goals that the Ph.D. Program in Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) has set forth for its graduate students.

END

MSE 00620:

Materials Science and Engineering Journal Club

This is a graduate level course which will teach students how to perform systematic and literature reviews. Students will
gain experience at writing and understanding the differences between literature searches, literature reviews, systematic
reviews, and meta-analysis. As well, students will be exposed to ideas in strong inference in scientific thinking to appreciate
how certain types of systematic thinking leads to more rapid progress than others. This course will use a combination of
lectures, in-class discussions, and project-based learning experiences to provide students with a strong foundation in
literature survey. At the end of this course, students will have an understanding of how to write a convincing literature
review for their dissertation. The learning goals listed above contribute to the program goals that the Ph.D. Program in
Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) has set forth for its graduate students.

END

MSE 00798:

PhD Dissertation Research Continuation

Prerequisites: MSE 00799

Continuation of supervised research leading to a Ph.D. dissertation in MSE.

END

MSE 00799:

PhD Dissertation Research

Prerequisite: Ph.D. Student Status

The Ph.D. dissertation highlights the research activities and outcomes, innovations, and key contributions to the field of
Materials Science and Engineering from a doctoral student. Completing a Ph.D. dissertation requires the student to identify
unsolved problems, formulate hypotheses for potential solutions, design experiments, implement theoretical, modeling, and
experimental methods, collect and analyze results, and draw conclusions. This is a long-term process that requires significant
dedication in time and effort from the student. PhD Dissertation Research is a research course designed to provide
necessary time and guidance for the student to work on cutting edge research towards the Ph.D. degree while retaining
full-time status as a graduate student. All Ph.D. students are expected to take appropriate number of credits of this course
for their doctoral research. Taking these research credits will guide students in preparation, execution, and defense of their
Ph.D. dissertations. Each section of this course will be associated with a faculty member. Each Ph.D. student will take the
particular section from his/her Ph.D. advisor, who will be guiding the student’s doctoral research.

END

MSE 01700:

Foundations in Processing, Manufacturing, and Properties of Materials

This course will enable students to explore the myriad of ways that processing and manufacturing dictate properties in
materials. Students will see presentations by invited speakers whose talks will focus on various processing and manufacturing
techniques and how those techniques lead to the observed material properties. Property measurement techniques will also
be covered. The learning goals listed above contribute to the program goals that the Ph.D. Program in Materials Science and
Engineering (MSE) has set forth for its graduate students.

END

PHSC 01532:

Physical Science Activity for Teachers

This course will provide an in-depth study of selected topics in physics and/or chemistry. It will focus on deepening
content knowledge through activity and inquiry based learning that can be emulated and translated to the K–8 classroom.
This course is meant to prepare middle school teachers to cover physical science topics required by the K–8 NJ Core
Curriculum Science Standards with an emphasis on activity/lab processes.

END

PHSC 01599:

INDEPENDENT STUDY

Prerequisites: None

There is no description for this course

END

PHYS 00150:

Physics Of Everyday Life (Lecture and Lab)

The goal of this course is to expose students with a non-science background to physics. The students will experience the
excitement of physics by examining phenomena of our everyday environment. The historical development of such ideas will
be studied as well. Topics selected for study include mechanics, matter, heat, sound, light, electricity, magnetism, atomic
and nuclear physics. Physics will be communicated in a conceptual framework along with straightforward algebraic and
trigonometric formulations.

END

PHYS 00210:

Physics I Without Calculus (Lecture and Lab)

Prerequisites: Score of at least 60 on CLM OR MATH 01122 OR MATH 01130 with concurrent registration allowed OR MATH 01140 with concurrent registration allowed

This course studies the principles of mechanics, heat, and fluids. Calculus is not used. The course emphasizes problem
work involving the use of algebra, trigonometry, and geometry.

END

PHYS 00211:

Physics II Without Calculus (Lecture and Lab)

Prerequisites: PHYS 00210 or PHYS 00220

This course studies the basic principles of electricity, magnetism, and light. Calculus is not used. The course emphasizes
problem work involving the use of algebra, trigonometry, and geometry.

END

PHYS 00220:

Introductory Mechanics (Lecture and Lab)

Co/Prerequisite: MATH 01130 or Math 01140

This course studies the basic principles or mechanics and is equivalent to most calculus-based introductory mechanics
courses often entitled Physics I. The course is designed to cover introductory mechanics (Newton's laws, energy and
momentum conservation, rotating systems, statics, gravity and simple harmonic motion) at a level appropriate for future
scientists and engineers. The course includes a laboratory component and it emphasizes problem-solving techniques.

END

PHYS 00221:

Introductory Thermodynamics, Fluids, Waves, & Optics (Lecture and Lab)

Prerequisites: PHYS 00220Corequisite: MATH 01131 or MATH 01141

This introductory course studies the basic principles of thermodynamics, fluids, waves, and optics and their application.
The concepts will be applied through problem solving and laboratory experiences. A large portion of the content of this
course builds from the concept of conservation of energy covered in the introductory mechanics course. The course is
required for physics majors and recommended for those majoring in biochemistry, chemistry, biology, engineering, or
mathematics. The specific topics covered include elastic properties of materials, fluid mechanics, mechanical waves, sound,
conduction of heat, kinetic theory of gases, the laws of thermodynamics, light, geometric optics, interference and
diffraction.

END

PHYS 00222:

Introductory Electricity & Magnetism (Lecture and Lab)

Prerequisites: PHYS 00220Corequisite: MATH 01131 or MATH 01141

This course studies the basic principles of electricity and magnetism and is equivalent to most calculus-based introductory
electricity and magnetism courses often entitled Physics II. The course is designed to cover introductory electricity and
magnetism (charge, current, potential, fields, AC and DC circuits, Maxwell's Equations, and electromagnetic waves) at a
level appropriate for future scientists and engineers. The course includes a laboratory component and it emphasizes
problem-solving techniques.

END

PHYS 00300:

Modern Physics (Lecture and Lab)

Prerequisites: (MATH 01131 or MATH 01141) AND(PHYS 00211 or PHYS 00222)

This course covers modern physics developed since the turn of the 20th century. After a review of some classical physics,
course topics include special relativity, wave and particle aspects of radiation, matter waves, models of the atom, ionization,
spectra, x-rays, and introductory quantum theory. It also covers theories developed by Planck, Einstein, Rutherford, Bragg,
Bohr, Compton, de Broglie, Pauli, Schrodinger and Heisenberg.

END

PHYS 00310:

Analytical Mechanics

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 AND MATH 01230

This course teaches students Newtonian, Lagrangian, and Hamiltonian formulations of mechanics, and their applications
to such problems as central force motion, linear and nonlinear oscillations, collisions between particles, noninertial systems,
coupled oscillations and normal coordinates, and rigid bodies.

END

PHYS 00320:

Electricity & Magnetism I

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 AND MATH 01230

This course studies classical electromagnetism. Its topics include: the laws of electromagnetic force, Maxwell's equations,
electromagnetic induction, interaction of currents, and electromagnetic energy and waves.

END

PHYS 00330:

Mathematical Methods for Physics

Prerequisites: MATH 01230 Corequisite: PHYS 00300 (Concurrent enrollment allowed)

This course studies mathematical topics as they apply to physics: complex numbers, determinants and matrices, Fourier
series, as well as ordinary and partial differentiation. Certain more advanced topics may be treated: calculus of variations,
gamma and beta functions, coordinate transformations, tensor analysis, functions of complex variable, Legendre
polynomials, and Bessel functions. The course will include computational as well as analytical methods.

END

PHYS 00340:

Optics & Light (Lecture and Lab)

Prerequisites: PHYS 00211 and PHYS 00300 orpermission from the instructor to bypass PHYS 00300

This course studies the nature and propagation of light, dispersion, reflection and refraction at plane and spherical
surfaces, lenses (thin and thick), aberrations of lenses and mirrors, optical instruments, polarization, diffraction, and
photometry. It also discusses modern developments and techniques (such as fiber optics, lasers, holography).

END

PHYS 00360:

Molecular Biophysics

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 OR MCB 01102

This course is aimed at understanding the physics of biological systems. The goal of the course is to quantitatively define
biological systems and their functions. Key emphasis will be placed on (1) understanding theories, laws, and axioms that
govern systems and their behavior and (2) the use of physics to determine quantitative information about systems and their
behaviors. For each topic, the basic laws of physics will be reviewed followed by their application to specific biomolecular
and biological system examples. the laboratory component is aimed at giving students hands-on experience in measurement
and observation for biological systems.

END

PHYS 00410:

Quantum Mechanics I

Prerequisites: PHYS 00300 AND MATH 01230

This course will serve as an introduction to quantum mechanics. Students will learn the basic concepts of quantum
mechanics and how to solve simple problems using quantum mechanics. Topics selected for study include the origins of
quantum mechanics, the free particle in wave mechanics, particles in one-dimensional potentials, the axiomatic formulation
of quantum physics, particles in three-dimensions, spin, and the Pauli exclusion principle.

END

PHYS 00430:

Statistical Physics

Prerequisites: PHYS 00310 or PHYS 00320

The student will study in detail the laws of thermodynamics. The statistical derivation of these laws will be presented.
Topics include: ideal gases, classical and quantum distribution functions, phase transitions, and other special topics.

END

PHYS 00545:

Geometric Optical Design

This course introduces students to the fundamentals of geometric optics, matrix theory, aberration theory, and optical
design. This course will also cover an overview of traditional lens designs such as landscape lenses, periscopic lenses, ocular
lenses (eyepieces), telescopes, and spectrographs. Students will be introduced to the concepts of utilizing merit functions
and solves within industry-standard optical design software to conceptualize, design, optimize, and analyze optical systems.
The requirements of this course include a graduate project and/or research paper.

END

PHYS 00547:

Lasers

Prerequisites: PHYS 02559 or PHYS 00340 or Permission of the Instructor.

This course introduces students to the fundamentals of laser physics through a practical understanding of common laser
designs and their unique characteristics, such as coherence, monochromaticity, and Gaussian beams. In addition, students
will get an overview of the pros and cons of various gas, solid-state, and diode lasers while developing an understanding of
both pulsed and continuous-wave lasers. The requirements of this course include a graduate project and/or research paper.

END

PHYS 02525:

Mathematical Methods In Physics

Prerequisites: MATH 01131 and PHYS 02201

The following topics are studied as they apply to the solution of problems in physics: infinite series, complex numbers,
determinants and matrices, partial differentiation, vector analysis and calculus, and Fourier series. The requirements of this
course also include independent study of topics not discussed in class. The student will be expected to turn in a paper
demonstrating his ability to solve problems in two or more of the following topics: calculus of variations, gamma and beta
functions, coordinate transformations and tensor analysis, coordinate transformations and tensor analysis, functions of a
complex variable, series solutions of differential equations, integral transforms, and partial differential equations. Admission
to the course will be at the discretion of the graduate advisor.

END

PHYS 02527:

Statistical Mechanics

The student will consider the laws of thermodynamics from a statistical point of view. Topics may include: ideal gases,
simple thermodynamic systems, classical and quantum distribution functions, phase transitions, and other special topics.
The requirements for this course include a graduate laboratory project and/or research paper. Admission to the course will
be at the discretion of the graduate advisor.

END

PHYS 02528:

Electricity And Magnetism I

This course studies static fields and charges and the application of vector calculus to electricity and magnetism. Maxwell's
equations are derived from basic electrostatic phenomena. Some of the immediate consequences of Maxwell's equations,
such as electromagnetic waves, will also be covered. The requirements of this course include a graduate research paper or a
laboratory project. Admission to the course will be at the discretion of the graduate advisor.

END

PHYS 02529:

Electricity And Magnetism II

In this course, some of the major consequences of Maxwell's equations, such as the generation and propagation of
electromagnetic waves, scattering, and special relativity will be explored. A special attention will be given to the connection
of electricity and magnetism with relativity. The requirements of this course include a graduate laboratory project or
research paper. Admission to the course will be at the discretion of the graduate advisor.

END

PHYS 02530:

Applied Physics Lab

This course introduces modern experimental techniques commonly used in physics. Projects consist of original
experimental research experiences in Solid State Physics, Laser Physics, and/or other experimental areas of current research
in the department. Experimental results are correlated with existing theories. Technical writing and presentation skills are
developed and evaluated.

END

PHYS 02541:

Quantum Mechanics I

This course will serve as an introduction to quantum mechanics. Students will learn the basic concepts of quantum
mechanics and how to solve simple problems using quantum mechanics. Topics selected for study include the origins of
quantum mechanics, the free particle in wave mechanics, particles in one-dimensional potentials, the axiomatic formulation
of quantum physics, particles in three-dimensions, spin and the Pauli exclusion principle. The requirements of this course
include a graduate research paper or a laboratory project.

END

PHYS 02542:

Quantum Mechanics II

This course is a continuation of Quantum Mechanics I. Students will learn more advanced concepts and problems in
quantum mechanics. Topics selected for study include the formalism of quantum mechanics, particles in three-dimensions,
spin and angular momentum, quantum statistical mechanics, time-independent perturbation theory, time-dependent
perturbation theory, and scattering. Some topics may overlap with the ones in Quantum Mechanics I, but are taught at a
higher level. The requirements of this course include a graduate research paper or a laboratory project.

END

PHYS 02555:

Mechanics

Emphasizes Newton's laws of motion, the conservation laws, kinetics and reactions, calculation of moments of inertia,
periodic motion and heat. Theories and principles will be related to the motion and properties of gross bodies, and the
relevance of these ideas to modern atomic physics will be pointed out. The requirements of this course include a graduate
laboratory project and/or research paper. Admission to the course will be at the discretion of the graduate adviser. This
course may not be offered annually.

END

PHYS 02559:

Light

Prerequisites: (MATH 01131 and PHYS 02201) or (MATH 01131 and PHYS 02203)

Geometrical and physical optics are treated. Study is made of reflection, refraction, lenses (thin and thick) and systems of
lenses. Consideration is given to dispersion, diffraction, interference and polarization. The use of these effects in
spectroscopy and polarimetry is emphasized. The requirements of this course include a graduate laboratory project and/or
research paper. Admission to the course will be at the discretion of the graduate adviser.

END

PHYS 02560:

Advanced Molecular Biophysics

This course is aimed at understanding the physics of biological systems at the molecular level. The goal of the course is to
quantitatively understand relationships between biomolecular structures and function. Key emphasis will be placed on (1)
understanding theories, laws, and axioms that govern biomolecules and their behavior and (2) the use of experimental
physics to determine quantitative information about biomolecules and their behaviors. For each topic, the laws of
thermodynamics will be reviewed followed by their application to specific biomolecular and biological system examples. the
laboratory component is aimed at giving students hands-on experience in measurement and observation of biomolecular
structures and their thermodynamics transitions. Students will engage in both an experimental research project and
preparation of a review article on a biomolecular system of their choice.

END

PHYS 02561:

Electronics

A basic course in the theory of generation and detection of electromagnetic waves leading to a study of vacuum tubes,
rectifiers, amplifiers, oscillators, oscilloscopes, electronic switches and wave generators. The requirements of this course
include a graduate laboratory project and/or research paper. Admission to the course will be at the discretion of the graduate
adviser.

END

PHYS 02563:

Atomic Physics

Considers the molecular structure of matter and the structure of the atom. Studies the kinetic theory of gases, the
photoelectric effect, x-rays and their properties, the wave properties of matter, the Bohr model of the atom and the
excitation states of the atom. The requirements of this course include a graduate laboratory project and/or research paper.
Admission to the course will be at the discretion of the graduate adviser.

END

PHYS 02571:

Advanced Biophysics: Fundamentals of Biomaterials

This course is aimed at applying material physics and technology to regulate and support biological systems and functions.
A goal of the course is to fundamentally understand the physics aspects of variable biomaterials and their interactions with
biological systems (cells, tissues, organs). A second goal is to use material physics and technology as a tool to design and
fabricate biomaterials for artificial tissues and organs, or biophysical devices and sensors. Finally, students will learn and
understand public healthcare policies, needs, and resources.

END

PHYS 02572:

TOPICS ADV PHYSICS

END

PHYS 02599:

INDEP STUDY PHYS SCI

END

CSSR 99501:

Data Literacy for Civil/Public Service

This course will introduce students to "the language of data." Students will explore different types of data, learn about data
attributes, and develop skills in data-informed decision making.

END

CSSR 99502:

Data Analysis for Civil/Public Service

Prerequisites: EDPA 02512 and CJ 09511 and CJ 09512

This course provides students with a foundational introduction to data analysis. Students will have the opportunity to learn
exploratory analysis, hypothesis testing, and data visualization in software's commonly used in civil and public service. By the
end of the course, students will produce an original analysis and visualizations which can be used to demonstrate their skills
to employers.

END

CSSR 99503:

Policy Agendas Project New Jersey

Prerequisites: CSSR 99501 or CSSR 99502 or EDPA 02512 or CJ 09511

The course is a hands-on experience in research design and data collection. Students will have a central role in gathering,
coding, and analyzing data for the Policy Agendas Project - New Jersey which will be housed at Rowan. The Policy Agendas
Project is a free, online tool used by scholars, the public, and lawmakers.

END

ECON 04101:

An Introduction To Economics-A Macroeconomic Perspective

This course analyzes the overall level of economic activity in the United States and examines its major determinants, public
stabilization policies, economic growth and international trade.

END

ECON 04102:

An Introduction To Economics-A Microeconomic Perspective

This course analyzes resource allocation among alternative uses. It studies consumer demand, product and factor price
determination, general equilibrium and optimal income distribution.

END

ECON 07520:

Colloquium in Economics

This course introduces students to in-depth analysis of a selected theme in Economics, including economic theories,
models, and method as well as intensive research, data analysis, problem solving, and class discussion. Selected topics include
Economic Development, Environmental Economics, Global Economics, Health Economics, Labor Economics, Public
Finance, Money & Banking, and Urban Economics.

END

EDPA 02320:

Public Administration

Students consider public administration principles and organizations, internal governmental administrative structures, the
interactions between organizations and their environments, personnel and policy procedures, administrative
communication methods, and other management techniques. This course may not be offered annually.

END

EDPA 02410:

Public Policy

Students analyze U.S. public policy using a variety of conceptual models including cost-benefit analysis. Case studies are
emphasized. This course may not be offered annually.

END

EDPA 02490:

Public Service Internship

Students are provided with an opportunity to get first-hand experience in government administration and related political
processes through work in a variety of public settings (government agencies, public officials' offices, law firms, etc.).

END

EDPA 02510:

Introduction to Policy Analysis

This course explores various aspects of the policy process. Students analyze U.S. public policy using a variety of conceptual
models, including cost-benefit analysis, with an emphasis on case studies.

END

EDPA 02512:

Quantitative Methods in Public Policy

This course introduces students to basic statistical methods and their application to public policy analysis. The course
covers the essential elements of descriptive statistics, univariate and bivariate statistical inference, multivariate analysis, and
data visualization. In addition to covering statistical theory the course emphasizes applied statistics and data analysis. The
primary goals of this course are to introduce quantitative skills and encourage a critical approach to reviewing statistical
findings.

END

EDPA 02514:

Essentials of Economics for Public Policy

This course examines the macroeconomic and microeconomic theories, concepts, and empirical content as they relate and
apply to public policy. It explores topics of resource allocation and economic well-being at the individual, local, and national
scale, with an emphasis placed on the role of government in solving problems inherent to the free market.

END

EDPA 02516:

State and Local Politics in Policy Analysis

This course provides students with an overview of politics and policy in state and local government. Students will use the
comparative method to analyze public policy across the states and within localities. Students will learn about federalism,
intergovernmental relations and policy innovation.

END

EDPA 02518:

Public Finance and Cost-Benefit Analysis

This course introduces market failure as a justification for government provision of public goods and regulation. It will
cover public choice theory and cost-benefit analysis for public expenditure, impact of taxation on efficiency, incidence of
taxes, personal and corporate income taxes, and fiscal federalism.

END

EDPA 02520:

Social Policy

This course examines the main theories and empirical developments in social policy. Special attention is paid to the role of
politics in both new and emerging social policy debates. A mix of perennial and emerging (e.g. accommodating identity,
immigration, and aging) social policy problems are discussed. There will be an emphasis on case studies.

END

EDPA 02530:

Health Policy

The course examines the intersection of health and public policy. Surveying a range of subjects, it presents an overview of
public health, focusing on policy interventions, the influence of various stakeholders in policy decisions, the population
health consequences of such decisions, and the policy issues confronting public health practitioners.

END

EDPA 02540:

Environmental Economic Policy

This course uses the tools of economic and policy analysis to analyze environmental problems, solutions, and regulations.
Topics include air and water pollution, climate change, international trade, international environmental agreements and
sustainable development.

END

EDPA 02580:

Public Policy Internship

Prerequisites: 9 earned semester hours in the Master in Public Policy (MPP) Program

This course provides students with practical experience which complements and enhances the knowledge and skills gained
in the academic program. Through their placements, students will come into direct contact with policy problems and
develop a policy plan tailored to their particular policy setting, ensuring that their academic understanding is well-informed
and connected to real-world conditions.

END

EDPA 02590:

Thesis in Public Policy I

Prerequisites: 9 completed semester hours in the MPP program

Through coursework and background research, this course enables students to focus their policy interests on a significant
thesis project, which will serve as the capstone to their MA in Public Policy. In particular, students will develop a question
that has yet to be answered by prior research. Students will work with a research advisor to fine-tune their question and
hypothesis. Then students work with a faculty who will act as their thesis director on the project.
Students emerge from the thesis process with a solid understanding of how original research is executed and how to best
communicate research results. Students will be encouraged to publish their research in academic or professional journals.

END

EDPA 02592:

Thesis in Public Policy II

Prerequisites: EDPA 02592

Through coursework and background research, this course enables students to focus their policy interests on a significant
thesis project, which will serve as the capstone to their MA in Public Policy. In particular, students will develop a question
that has yet to be answered by prior research. Students will work with a research advisor to fine-tune their question and
hypothesis. Then students work with a faculty member who will act as their thesis director on the project.
Students emerge from the thesis process with a solid understanding of how original research is executed and how to best
communicate research results. Students will be encouraged to publish their research in academic or professional journals.

END

EDPA 02690:

Capstone in Public Policy

The capstone course project is the culmination of the Master of Public Policy. Students will have the opportunity to
complete a project directed by an internal or external client. Students will then present their project to an audience that
includes the organization, their peers and faculty members. This course will provide students with a chance to apply their
content knowledge from their coursework to problem-solving in the field. Students will also benefit from the experience and
professional development that working on this project affords.

END

POSC 07100:

Introduction To Government And Politics

Professors who teach this course will normally focus on some, but not all, of the following topics: political and
governmental structures, functions, and processes; political behavior; public law and public policy; and political values or
philosophies.

END

POSC 07110:

American Government

This course focuses on the American Federal government, emphasizing the structure, operation and processes of our
political system. Coverage will include political values as they are reflected in major public policies.

END

POSC 07230:

Comparative Political Systems

This course presents a comparative analysis of the fundamental law, political institutions, policies and processes and their
relationship to political culture in Britain, France, the C.I.S. and a selected Third World country.

END

POSC 07321:

Contemporary World Problems

This course examines selected problems such as terrorism, world population and hunger, regional conflicts and arms
control and disarmament.

END

POSC 07360:

Methodology And Statistics In Political Science Research

This course considers the varied ways that political scientists study problems, with primary attention to scientific method
and quantitative skills. Students are expected to become adept at using and interpreting forms of descriptive statistics
commonly used in the social sciences.

END

POSC 07520:

CIVIL RIGHTS/LIBERTIES

END

POSC 07530:

Colloquium in Political Science

This course explores various ways in which the executive, legislative, and judicial branches influence the policy process in
the United States, as well as introducing students to elements of the political system - its bureaucracy, foreign policy
establishment, parties and interest groups - that also inform public policy.

END

CANN 03501:

Cannabis Legislation, Regulations, and Policy Evaluation

This course will examine the legislative, regulatory, and policy landscapes for the cultivation, manufacture, and retail sale of
cannabis in the legal market. While an emphasis will be on New Jersey regulations, statutes, and policies, students will also
gain a clear understanding of federal policies, laws, and regulations that govern the legal cannabis industry and how these
policies impact compliance. Furthermore, the medicinal use of cannabis, public safety, and how the various policies interact
and impact institutions, workplaces, and social equity will be explored. Additionally, various federal, state, local and
industry-wide cannabis compliance topics will be outlined and discussed in this course.

END

CANN 03502:

Marijuana Legalization and Decriminalization in Work, Leisure and Other Settings

The problems, nature, and effects of cannabis legalization and/or decimalization within and across workplace settings and
institutions such as families, leisure facilities, schools/higher education institutions, health care facilities/hospitals,
transportation hubs, police departments, jails, and prisons will be explored. The course will emphasize the use of cannabis in
social and institutional contexts, the legal implications of cannabis use within institutions, and approaches for counteracting
and avoiding cannabis use including, community programs, and testing programs, and policies will be examined. Social
control and programmatic approaches in the context of promoting a safe and productive environment and a part of
regulatory compliance will be discussed.

END

CANN 03503:

Cannabis Research, Program Evaluation, and Policy Development

This course offers an applied approach to systematically collect and analyze data on the performance of programs and
policies with a focus on determining whether a particular program or policy is achieving its goals. In this course, students
will examine evaluation designs to better understand different programmatic and research assumptions to assist in program
development and policymaking in the field of cannabis and the cannabis industry.

END

CMS 05381:

PSYCHOLINGUISTICS

END

PSY 01107:

Essentials Of Psychology

Students will be introduced to psychology, the scientific study of behavior. This course will highlight the key areas in
psychology that help to explain human behavior. This course will include discussion of diverse topics such as, perception,
learning, thinking, memory, motivation, emotion, stress, and health, personality, physiological processes, psychological
disorders and treatment, development, intelligence, and social psychology.

END

PSY 01108:

Essentials of Psychology for Pre-Health Students

Prerequisites: Declared Pre-Health Concentration or enrolled in CMSRU Post-Bac in Premedical Sciences program

This specific Essentials of Psychology course is designed for students planning to attend medical school and take the
MCAT, which includes a new section on Psychology. This class will prepare students to take that section of the MCAT.
Students will be introduced to psychology, the scientific study of behavior. This course will highlight the key areas in
psychology that help to explain human behavior. This course will include discussion of diverse topics such as perception,
learning, thinking, memory, motivation, emotion, stress, and health, personality, physiological processes, psychological
disorders and treatment, development, intelligence, and social psychology.

END

PSY 01199:

Navigating Psychology

Prerequisites: B.A. in Psychology or B.S. in Psychological Science as declared major

This course provides students with information and guidance regarding their future education in Psychology. This
introductory class gives incoming Psychology students resources that they will need to guide their coursework, professional
development, and research/employment to further their psychological education and future careers. This course will prepare
students to make decisions that will tailor their Psychology program to their interests and goals. During this course,
assessments are also taken as a part of larger program assessment.

END

PSY 01230:

Psychology Of Personality

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

Students study major theories of personality and techniques for measuring personality. Personality is that field of
psychology that investigates the predispositions or inherited characteristics and the acquired or learned qualities that affect
an individual.

END

PSY 01316:

Behavioral Assessment And Measurement

Prerequisites: PSY 02310

This course provides students with the knowledge and skills needed to conduct behavioral assessments and choose
appropriate target outcomes and intervention strategies. Additionally, students will learn to objectively measure behavior,
display data graphically, and experimentally evaluate the effectiveness of behavioral interventions. This course is one of the
courses required for the Specialization in Behavioral Services for Children and Their Families in the psychology department.

END

PSY 01326:

Perception

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course involves the study of sensation and perception. Topics include the scientific study of sensory systems, classical
and contemporary psychophysical methods, principles of perceptual organization, aftereffects, illusions and space
perception.

END

PSY 01327:

Cognitive Psychology

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course involves the study of information processing. Its topics may include the history and methods of cognitive
psychology, selection and processing of sensory information, pattern recognition, memory processes, language acquisition
and cognition.

END

PSY 01424:

Professional Issues In Applied Behavior Analysis

Prerequisites: PSY 02305 (Concurrency Allowed) AND PSY 02310AND PSY 02320 AND PSY 02325

This course is a capstone course in Specialization for Behavioral Services for Children and their Families, providing an
in-depth overview of innovative and empirically validated behavior assessment and intervention techniques aimed at
promoting system-wide change. Students will be exposed to professional development as behavior analysts including ethical
issues, career options and responsibilities, and development of clinical skills.

END

PSY 01425:

Fieldwork in Applied Behavior Analysis

Prerequisites: PSY 02305 AND PSY 02320 AND PSY 02325

Students should be matriculated in the Specialization for Behavioral Services for Children & Families OR the
Post-Baccalaureate in ABA to enroll in this course due to limited enrollment. Students are assigned placements in applied
settings under the supervision of a Board Certified Behavior Analyst (BCBA) to gain experience in the design and
implementation of behavioral interventions. Students are required to complete 150 hours of supervised fieldwork in their
assigned placements.

END

PSY 01499:

Psychology Senior Capstone

Prerequisites: Students must have at least 100 completed credits

This course provides students with information and guidance regarding their future careers in Psychology and the
resources they will need to further their education and possible careers. During this course, assessments are also taken as a
part of larger program assessment.

END

PSY 01500:

Professional Skills for Behavior Analysts

Prerequisites: Matriculation into the MA in ABA.

This course introduces students to the professional standards of the field of applied behavior analysis. This course
emphasizes essential skills and strategies that students need to be successful professional behavior analysts. Topics include
vital work habits, interpersonal relationships, business skills, applying behavioral knowledge, consulting repertoires,
introduction to professional and scientific writing, and professional service. This course is the first course to be taken in the
MA in the ABA program and will be offered annually.

END

PSY 01501:

Independent Study in Psychology

END

PSY 01510:

Philosophy, History, and Conceptual Foundations of Behavior Analysis

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the Master of Arts InApplied Behavior Analysis.

The course provides an in-depth examination of the philosophical and conceptual underpinnings of behavior analytic
theory. Students will evaluate how behavior analysis as a conceptual system fits in the larger historical and conceptual
contexts of philosophy, science, and psychology. Applications to behavior analytic problem solving and case
conceptualization in applied setting will be emphasized.

END

PSY 01550:

Clinical Research Practicum

Prerequisites: PSY 01.500 AND PSY 01.510

This graduate level course will provide students with the prerequisite skills needed to develop an independently executed
research project evaluating applied behavior analytic techniques for changing behavior. In this course, students will meet
with a Faculty Advisor regularly to read and review current literature to gain an appreciation and critical understanding of
research in the area of Applied Behavior Analysis. Students will also work with more senior students to get experience with
recruiting participants, executing a study protocol, collecting and coding data, and analyzing and interpreting data. Finally,
students will lead discussions and review literature relevant to their own independent research project.

END

PSY 01564:

Counseling Theory And Techniques I

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the Master's Program in Clinical Mental Health Counseling

This course is designed to be an overview of several major theoretical approaches to psychotherapy, including:
Humanistic-Existential, Behavioral, and Cognitive-Behavioral. The course will include didactic and experiential
components, and will focus on developing the skills and knowledge necessary to use techniques from these theories in a
professional context.

END

PSY 01566:

Counseling Theory And Techniques II

Prerequisites: PSY 09595 and PSY 01564 with grade of B- or above

This course is designed to be an overview of several major theoretical approaches to psychotherapy, including:
Psychodynamic, Systems, Cognitive, and Interpersonal. The course will include didactic and experiential components, and
will focus on developing the skills and knowledge necessary to use techniques from these theories in a professional context.
In addition to these general skills, the course will also focus on the application of these techniques to specific populations of
interest within the psychological community.

END

PSY 01570:

Research Methodology And Statistics In Counseling Psychology

This is a graduate level introduction to research methodology and statistics with special application of these principles to
the practice of mental health counseling. Students will develop the skills necessary to critically evaluate and interpret
research and statistics, thus allowing them to be excellent consumers of research as well as developing practice-relevant
research projects.

END

PSY 01572:

Research Methodology And Statistics In Counseling Psychology I: Basics

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the Masters Program in Clinical Mental Health Counseling

This is a graduate level introduction to research methodology and statistics with special application of these principles to
the practice of mental health counseling. Students will develop the skills necessary to critically evaluate and interpret
research and statistics, thus allowing them to be excellent consumers of research as well as developing practice-relevant
research projects.

END

PSY 01574:

Research Methodology And Statistics In Counseling Psychology II: Applied

Prerequisites: PSY 01572 with B- or above

In this graduate level course, students will learn how to apply the skills learned in Research Methodology & Statistics in
Counseling Psychology I: Basic course through all of the steps required to propose an empirical project requiring either
postulating a testable hypothesis and delineating the methodology used to test the hypothesis or to apply knowledge of
research methodology to the empirical evaluation of counseling interventions with a single or small number of clients.

END

PSY 01610:

Career And Lifestyle Development

Advanced students will learn the major theories of career choice and development, gaining an understanding of the
complex personal, organizational, and societal factors that impact upon career choice. Students will learn to understand
occupational trends and occupational classification systems, and have the opportunity to study and administer various
career interest batteries. Students will gain an appreciation for the changing nature of work and career focus across the life
span, including predictable career transitions and challenges. Theoretical and self assessment techniques will be utilized to
help students gain an understanding of the need for balance between work and personal life, and will provide insight into the
theories and choices involved in leisure activity and in stress management practices. Experiential exercises and projects will
be an integral aspect of the course leading to an appreciation not only of theory but of its application.

END

PSY 01612:

Group Counseling And Psychotherapy

Prerequisites: PSY 09595 and PSY 01624 with grade of B- or above

This course addresses fundamental issues concerning the development and dynamics of group counseling and provides the
student with a background in group counseling theories and methods. Issues covered include group process components,
the stages of group development and leadership styles and approaches. Methods for evaluating the effectiveness of group
counseling are discussed.

END

PSY 01615:

Professional Proseminar

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the Master's Program in Clinical Mental Health Counseling

This seminar is intended to serve two purposes for students in the first year of training in the MA Program in Clinical and
Counseling Psychology. First, students will be provided with the ability to discuss how the skills and knowledge they have
acquired during their training should be integrated to form a coherent professional identity. Second, students will have the
opportunity to gain more knowledge and understanding of the profession they are being trained in and how to become an
active/contributing member to that profession. Current accreditation standards in the field place a particular emphasis on
students developing a solid sense of professional identity, which includes knowledge of a) the history of the profession, b)
current trends in the field, c) licensing and credentialing issues, and d) areas of work and influence in the field. This course
will provide the vehicle for discussing and desseminating these issues.

END

PSY 01616:

The Counseling Profession: Ethics And Professional Identity

This course is designed to enrich the student's understanding of the counseling profession and the professional identity of
counselors. The student will be exposed to the professional roles, functions, goals, and objectives of the counseling
profession, as well as organizations and associations of the profession. Students will study the history and development of
counseling as a profession and will examine current trends in counseling. Finally, the student will explore professional ethics
and standards of practice (ACA, ASGW, AMHCA, NCAD) and will become familiar with professional licensure in New
Jersey and national certifications (NBCC AND CCE) and with accreditations standards for counseling (CACREP). (For
Summer 2011 the course is offered as web-assisted, with some content delivered online.)

END

PSY 01620:

Legal, Ethical, and Professional Issues In Counseling

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the MA in CMHC, OR the CAGS in CMHC

This course covers legal and ethical issues involved in the delivery of human services and counseling. Issues addressed
include ethical standards for therapists, the role of the mental health professional in the legal system, and standards of
ethical practice for counselors. The student will consider the possible legal consequences of treatment decisions and
approaches. This course will provide an understanding of all aspects of professional functioning including history, roles,
ethics, standards and credentialing.

END

PSY 01623:

Psychopathology I: Diagnosis And Epidemiology

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the MA in CMHC, OR the CAGS in CMHC, OR PhD in Clinical Psychology

This course reviews the diagnostic criteria for the major categories of psychopathology included in the DSM-IV-TR. The
emphasis for course is reviewing the prevalence rates and differential diagnosis for the various categories. The course reviews
the concepts and skills necessary to provide a five axis diagnosis for adults and children.

END

PSY 01624:

Psychopathology II: Conceptualization And Etiology

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the MA in CMHC, OR the CAGS in CMHC, OR the PhD in Clinical Psychology AND a B- or above
in PSY 01623 Psychopathology I

This course reviews the diagnostic criteria for the major categories of psychopathology included in the DSM-IV-TR. The
course emphasizes the etiological facators for the various diagnostic categories as well as the course and prognosis for each
disorder. Current research for evidence based interventions for each of the disorders will also be reviewed.

END

PSY 01630:

Family Systems Theory And Family Therapy

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the MA in CMHC, OR Matriculation in the CAGS in CMHC AND permission from program coordinator

This graduate level course will explore the importance of family therapy in the human service delivery system. The course
will emphasize several areas. First, the course will review the major theoretical approaches to family therapy as well as the
foundation concepts of general system theory. Second, the skills and techniques unique to family therapy will be reviewed.
This aspect of the course will utilize role plays to demonstrate specific intervention strategies. Third, the course will review
assessment tools and evaluation research of family therapy. Finally, the ethical and documentation issues involved in a family
therapy will be discussed.

END

PSY 01650:

Practicum In Counseling

Prerequisites: PSY 01624 and PSY 01566 and PSY 01620

Students will be placed in human service settings where they will provide, under supervision, counseling and related
services. Both on-site and Psychology Department supervisors will monitor student progress. Students will work with clients
to establish goals for change, employ appropriate counseling techniques and evaluate goal attainment.

END

PSY 01660:

Practicum In Applied Behavior Analysis I

Prerequisites: PSY 02670 and Matriculation in the MA in Applied Behavioral Analysis

In this course students are placed in a community agency to apply their knowledge and skills in applied behavior analysis.
Students will be required to meet weekly with the instructor of the course.

END

PSY 01661:

Practicum In Applied Behavior Analysis II

Prerequisites: PSY 01660

In this course students are required to complete intensive supervised fieldwork in a community agency to further develop
their clinical skills in applied behavior analysis. Focus will be placed on advanced assessment, intervention, and maintenance
programming, treatment integrity, consultation, and staff supervision and training. Students will be required to meet weekly
with the instructor of the course.

END

PSY 01685:

Master's Thesis In Psychology I

Prerequisites: PSY 01574 with B- or above

This course requires the design of an independently executed research project. The project will be supervised by a member
of the Psychology Department. The student may choose a group design, single subject ABA design or Case Study for their
project. The thesis will include a literature review, design of the project and the initial implementation.

END

PSY 01687:

Master's Thesis In Psychology II

Prerequisites: PSY 01685

This course requires the completion of the independently executed research project that was initiated in Master's Thesis
in Psychology I. The project will be supervised by a member of the Psychology Department. Completion of the course will
include the production of a comprehensive final product that needs to be approved by the student's project supervisor.

END

PSY 01750:

Multicultural Perspectives

Prerequisites: Matriculation in Ph.D. Program in Clinical Psychology

The purpose of this course is to ensure that students know and are able to define culture, assimilation, acculturation, and
cultural differences, identify different types of diverty, explores challenges and benefits of diversity, recognize the problem
of sterotyping, prejudice, bias, and discrimination and the ways to avoid them, and describe ethnocentrism and its
relationships to diveresity. Students will gain specific competencies necessary to work effectively with an incresingly diverse
population. This graduate level lcourse is required for student in the Ph.D. program in Clinical Psychology.

END

PSY 01850:

DISSERTATION RESEARCH I

Prerequisites: Grade of Pass in PSY 03814

The purpose of this course is to for students to begin to work with their research advisors on their dissertations. At the end
of this course, students are expected to have completed at least one draft of the introduction of their research proposal. This
course is restricted to students matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 01852:

DISSERTATION RESEARCH II

Prerequisites: PSY 01.850 Dissertation Research I

The purpose of this course is to for students to continue to work with their research advisors to develop a high-quality,
scientifically rigorous research study. At the completion of this course, students are expected to have written a complete
proposal including the introduction, background, and methodology for the study. This course is restricted to students
matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 01853:

DISSERTATION RESEARCH III

Prerequisites: Grade of Pass in PSY 01852

The purpose of this course is to for students to continue to work with their research advisors to develop a high-quality,
scientifically rigorous research study. At the completion of this course, students are expected to have begun data collection.
This course is restricted to students matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 01854:

DISSERTATION RESEARCH IV

Prerequisites: Grade of Pass in PSY 01853

The purpose of this course is to for students to complete work on their dissertation research project. At the end of this
course, students are expected to have completed a draft of their research project. This course is restricted to students
matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 01855:

Dissertation Research

Prerequisites: Grade of B or higher in PSY 03815 or Permission from instructor

The purpose of this course is for students to begin to develop an empirical project that will result in a manuscript
containing a relevant literature review (Introduction), research aims/hypotheses, a detailed accounting of how info/data were
collected or compiled (Method section), an accounting of the statistical analyses applied and the results, with a discussion
portion that adequately explores the implications of the findings. This course is restricted to students matriculated into the
doctoral program in Clinical Psychology.

END

PSY 01856:

Dissertation Continuation

Prerequisites: Matriculation in doctoral program in clinical psychology and Completion of all dissertation research credits required for the degree and Departmental and Dean’s office approval

Continuation of supervised research leading to a doctoral dissertation.

END

PSY 02305:

Applied Behavior Analysis

Prerequisites: PSY 02310

This course deals with the principles, procedures and utility of behavior modification in normal and clinical settings.

END

PSY 02310:

Learning And Behavior

Prerequisites: (PSY 01107or PSY 01108) or Matriculation in the Post-Baccalaureate Certificate in Applied BehaviorAnalysis

This course provides an overview of the experimental analysis of behavior with minor attention to other theories of
learning. Topics may include classical conditioning, operant conditioning, and schedules of reinforcement.

END

PSY 02500:

Basic Principles Of Behavior

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MA or CAGS in Applied Behavior Analysis

This course is a graduate course in the basic principles of behavior. Course content includes the historical basis of behavior
analysis, the distinction between respondent/classical and operant conditioning, and the basic principles, processes, and
concepts of behavior analysis.

END

PSY 02510:

Research Methods In Behavior Analysis

Prerequisites: PSY 02500 and Matriculation in the MA or CAGS in Applied Behavioral Analysis

This course provides students with the knowledge and skills to choose and implement an appropriate experimental design
to evaluate the success of behavioral interventions.

END

PSY 02513:

Clinical Addictions Assessment

Prerequisites: PSY 09595 or PSY 03710

This course focuses on the assessment and diagnosis of common addictive disorders. Students will learn how to develop a
therapeutic alliance, conduct a comprehensive biopsychosocial assessment, and develop systematic diagnostic summaries
that include differential diagnosis and attention to co-occurring disorders such as gambling, eating disorders, and sexual
compulsivity as well as mental health disorders. Students will learn how to evaluate a variety of assessment instruments, and
to assess the impact of age, race, gender, social class, culture, ethnicity, spirituality, religion, sexual orientation, national
origin, and physical and mental ability on recovery from addictive disorders. This course is open to all students who have
completed the Introduction to Counseling course, but it is a required course for those in the Addiction Professional
Certification Program. Attendance at 8 12 step meetings will be required.

END

PSY 02520:

Assessment And Interventions For Social Skills And Relationships In Children

This course is a graduate course in examining the development of social and emotional competence in children, the
assessment of social skill deficits, and various interventions aimed at improving social skills and relationships in children and
children with special needs.

END

PSY 02523:

Clinical Addictions Treatment

Building upon the content learned in the previous Clinical course, this practice-based course focuses on addiction
counseling skills for work with individuals, couples, families, and groups, particularly for clients presenting with co-occurring
disorders. Students will learn strengths-based, evidence-based interventions including crisis intervention, Motivational
Interviewing, and Cognitive Behavioral approaches. As in all Addiction Professional Program courses, the impact of age,
race, gender, social class, culture, ethnicity, spirituality, religion, sexual orientation, national origin, and physical and mental
ability on treatment for addictive and co-occurring disorders will be infused throughout the course content. Attendance at 8
12 step meetings will be required.

END

PSY 02600:

ABC's Of Applied Behavior Analysis

This course provides a graduate level introduction to the field of behavior analysis. The course will cover the history of the
field,behavorial assessment,and behavorial intervention. The focus of this course is on knowledge of the field and not the
application of skills.

END

PSY 02610:

APPLIED BEHAVIOR ANALYSIS

Prerequisites: PSY 02500 and PSY 02620 and Matriculation in MA or CAGS in Applied Behavioral Analysis

This course is a graduate course in applied behavior analysis. Course content includes the conceptual foundation of applied
behavior analysis, the empirical support of the interventions used in the change and maintenance of human behavior, and
the skillful application and implementation of various techniques related to respondent and operant conditioning

END

PSY 02620:

Behavioral Assessment & Functional Analysis

Corequisite: PSY 02500 Prerequisites: Matriculation in the MA or CAGS in Applied Behavioral Analysis

This course teaches students how to conduct a comprehensive assessment for behavior problems, to identify, with the
client, the appropriate goals and objectives for intervention, to conduct the appropriate assessment techniques, and to select
the appropriate measurement procedures to evaluate outcomes.

END

PSY 02630:

Experimental Foundations of Behavior Therapy of Psychology

Prerequisites: Matriculation into Ph.D. Program in Clinical Psychology

This course provides Ph.D. students in Clinical Health Psychology wioth advanced and highly specialized knowledge in the
experimental analysis of human behavior, specifically as it relates to problems of clinical relevance. Students will matter the
conceptural underpinnings oifo the behavior therapies through an examination of complex behavior problems from a
behavior analytical and rigorously experimental perspective, including but not limited to behavioral economic, behavioral
momentum, variability, Skinner's analysis of verbal behavior, and Relational Frame Theory (RFT). This course is restricted
to students matriculated into the doctorial program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 02633:

Case Management in Addictions

Prerequisites: PSY 02513 and PSY 02523

Building upon the content learned in previous required Addiction Professional Certification courses, this course focuses
on case management skills needed for work with clients with substance use disorders (SUDs), co-occurring disorders, and
other psychosocial, health or life issues. Students will learn about coordinated care systems and the importance of treatment
teams, including how to properly consult with supervisors, counselors, professionals, and/or other service providers to assure
comprehensive, quality care for clients. Students will gain skills in researching, accessing, and referring for inter- or
intra-agency services. Topics such as HIV and the wide variety of community resources available in New Jersey will be
covered, in addition to NJ systems for Families and Children, Disabilities, Mental Health, Employment, and Criminal
Justice. As in all the Addictions Professional Certification Program courses, the impact of age, race, gender, social class,
culture, ethnicity, spirituality, religion, sexual orientation, national origin, and physical and mental ability on recovery from
addictive disorders will be infused throughout the course content. This course is open to all Addiction students who have
completed the course prerequisites, and it is required for the Addiction Professional Certification. Attendance at 8 12 step
meetings will be required.

END

PSY 02643:

Ethical Responsibility and Professional Development in Addictions

Prerequisites: PSY 02513 and PSY 02523

This course focuses on professional responsibility and development for professionals working with clients dealing with
substance use disorders (SUDs) and any co-occurring disorders or life issues. Students will learn the ethical standards, as well
as the ethical theory that should ground their decision-making. Federal, state, and licensing act regulations will be covered,
as will the benefits and best practices of clinical supervision and professional networking. Students will become familiar with
core functions and competencies, and the ways in which ongoing education will enhance their professional development.
Students will also identify the personal and professional risks to health and mental health for social workers and addictions
counselors, and learn self-care and other strategies to ensure professional effectiveness. The ethical and legal issues 
related to age, race, gender, social class, culture, ethnicity, spirituality, religion, sexual orientation, national origin, 
and physical and mental ability, and the ways in which counselors can work toward destigmatizing SUDs, will be infused throughout the
course content. Finally, students will participate in practical preparation for licensing, including mock exams, case
presentations, application completion, and job applications. This course is open to all Addiction Professional program
students who have completed the course prerequisites, and it is required for the Addiction Professional Certificate.

END

PSY 02660:

Research Project In Applied Behavior Analysis I

Prerequisites: PSY 02.510 and PSY 01.550

This graduate level course requires the design of an independently executed research project evaluating applied behavior
analytic techniques for changing behavior. In this course students will work from foundational skills acquired in the
prerequisite course in Research Methods in Behavior Analysis (PSY 02510) and with close instructor consultation to fully
design, write up, and defend the proposal of an empirical study.

END

PSY 02661:

Special Topics Applied Behavior Analysis

Prerequisites: PSY 02500 and PSY 01610

This course is a graduate seminar course providing in-depth coverage of special topics in the practice of Applied Behavior
Analysis. Course content will reflect the most current issues involving the design and implementation of behavioral
interventions for specific populations and circumstances. Course topics may include but are not limited to: verbal behavior,
curriculum design for children with autism, behavioral interventions for basic life skills, behavior analysis in education,
behavioral interventions for children with emotional/behavioral disorders, behavior analysis of addiction, legal issues for
applied behavior analysts, early intensive behavioral intervention, and large-scale behavioral intervention.

END

PSY 02662:

Research Project in Applied Behavior Analysis II

Prerequisites: PSY 02660

This capstone graduate level course requires the student to write and defend their completed, independently executed
research project evaluating applied behavior analytic techniques for changing behavior. In this course students will complete
their independent research project requirement that was proposed in the prerequisite course in Research Project in Applied
Behavior Analysis I (PSY 02660) with close instructor consultation. This is a required course for students pursuing the
Certificate of Graduate Studies (COG) in Research and Leadership in Applied Behavior Analysis.

END

PSY 02670:

Ethics In Applied Behavior Analysis

Prerequisites: PSY 02610 and PSY 02620 and Matriculation in MA or CAGS Applied Behavioral Analysis

This graduate level course is required for students in the Master's of Arts program in Applied Behavior Analysis. The
purpose of this course is to ensure that students know and are able to apply the Behavior Analyst Certification Board's
(BACB) Guidelines for Responsible Conduct for Behavior Analysts. In addition, students will be taught the BACB
Professional Disciplinary and Ethical Standards.

END

PSY 02671:

Behavioral Consultation, Supervision, and Management

Prerequisites: PSY 02670 and Matriculation in the MA or CAGS in Applied Behavioral Analysis

The purpose of this course is to provide students with best practice skills in behavior analytic personnel supervision,
management, and consultation. In this course students will learn to provide effective supervision, train staff to competency,
and improve personnel performance. Students will also demonstrate consultative competencies involving rapport building,
effective communication, problem identification and analysis, intervention selection, and outcome evaluation. This course
is required for all students in the Master of Arts in Applied Behavior Analysis program.

END

PSY 02672:

Performance Management

Prerequisites: PSY 02671 & Acceptance in the Concentration in Research & Leadership in Applied Behavior Analysis

This advanced graduate level course provides an overview of contemporary research and practice in the field of
Performance Management (PM), an area of specialization within Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) most closely aligned with
organizational behavior management and personnel/human resource management. The purpose of this course is to provide
students with the practical skills needed to apply the fundamental principles of ABA to a variety of performance problems in
organizational settings. This is a required course for students pursuing the Certificate of Graduate Study (COGS) in
Research and Leadership in ABA

END

PSY 02680:

Advanced Practice In Applied Behavior Analysis

Prerequisites: PSY 02500 and PSY 02510 and PSY 02610 and PSY 02620 and PSY 02670 and PSY 02690 and Permission of Program
Advisor

This course provides in-depth hands-on demonstration and practice of a variety of behavior analytic clinical techniques.
Students will demonstrate competencies in a variety of clinical skills including those involving specific behavior change
procedures, broad behavior change systems and the implementation, management, and supervision of those procedures.

END

PSY 02690:

Comprehensive Exam in Applied Behavior Analysis

Prerequisites: PSY 01510 and PSY 02500 and PSY 02620 and PSY 02610 and PSY 02510

This graduate level course requires the student to demonstrate that they have met the requirements for continuing in the
Master of Arts in Applied Behavior Analysis. The students will be required to satisfactorily complete a written and oral
comprehensive exam to pass this course. The comprehensive exams will cover all coursework completed up to that point.
This is a required course for students pursuing the Certificate of Graduate Studies (COGS) in Research in the Master’s of
Arts program in Applied Behavior Analysis.

END

PSY 02706:

Research Methods

Prerequisites: Matriculation into the Ph.D. in Clinical Psychology Program.

This doctoral level course provides an overview of group research methodologies frequently used in professional
psychological research. Topics covered in this course include validity and reliability, systematic observation, self report
measures, sampling techniques, control and comparison groups, treatment evaluation strategies, and research ethics. This
course is designed to provide students the tools to design their own research in the discipline of professional psychology as
well as the ability to evaluate research generated by others. This course is restricted to students matriculated into the
doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 02710:

Advanced Experimental Analysis of Behavior

Prerequisites: PSY 02500

This advanced, graduate level course requires the student to get a more in depth understanding of some of the more
complex topics addressed in the Experimental Analysis of Behavior that are initially introduced in the prerequisite course,
Basic Principles of Behavior.

END

PSY 03200:

Psychological Disorders

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

Psychological disorders are characterized by disturbances in emotion, cognition, or behavior associated with impaired
functioning and/or excessive (non-normative) distress. This course will review the historical/contemporary context for
diagnosing, the scientific principles for studying/treating disorder, the criteria-sets associated with identifying disorders, as
well as the the social, biological, individual and cultural/environmental factors that are believed to influence the
development (or perception) of disorder.

END

PSY 03205:

Intake And Interviewing Skills In Psychology

Prerequisites: (PSY 01107 or PSY 01108) and PSY 03200

This course is designed to prepare undergraduates to be able to perform an initial interview or intake in an entry level,
human service position. Topics include basic skill development, understanding of content and process in interviewing,
family interviews, use of standard intake procedures, and ethical considerations in interviewing.

END

PSY 03518:

Psychological Evaluation And Counseling Services To Combat Alcohol And Drug
Abuse

This course provides students with information needed to evaluate and counsel drug and/or alcohol dependent or addicted
individuals and their families. Topics covered include strategies necessary for the coordination and delivery of intervention
and referral services in a school setting.

END

PSY 03620:

Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment Strategies

Prerequisites: Matriculation into CAGS in Clinical Mental Health Counseling OR Minimum of B- in PSY 01650

This course is designed to be an overview of cognitive-behavioral treatment and theory. The course will include didactic
and experiential components, and will focus on developing the skills and knowledge necessary to use cognitive-behavioral
treatment in a professional context. In addition to these general skills, the course will also focus on the application of these
techniques to specific populations of interest within the psychological community.

END

PSY 03624:

Psychopathology Of Children And Adolescents

Prerequisites: Matriculation into MA or CAGS in Clinical Mental Health Counseling OR MA in School Psychology OR MA in
Applied Behavior Analysis OR Minimum of B- in PSY 01650

This course includes relating personality theory to psychopathology, diagnostic nomenclature in child psychopathology,
review of major psychotherapeutic approaches for children, techniques for working with parents and treatment facilities
away from home. This course may include field trips to appropriate agencies and as well as case preparation.

END

PSY 03701:

Assessment I: Psychometrics and Cognitive Testing

Prerequisites: Matriculation into Ph.D. Program in Clinical Psychology

This course is part of the two-course sequence and provides the foundational knowledge needed to critically evaluate test 
measures and their uses. In additiona. students will gain exposure to a wide range of cognitive assessment tools and 
strategies. Students will be taught the basic assessment skills necessary to conduct an initial consultation regarding cognitive 
issues, test selection, standardized test administration, test scoring & interpretaation using appropriate normative data 
while considering cultural factors, integrative report writing, and communications of results and treatmentrecommendations. Students will gain also be introduced to ethical and professional issues related to cognitive assessment,
and they will be expected to demostrate their skills as part of their classroom experience.

END

PSY 03704:

Assessment II: Individual Differences and Personality

Prerequisites: Grade of B- or better in PSY 03.701

This class is designed to promote an understanding of the unique individual and contextual factors that influences
individual development and personality. Issues related to personality test development and use will examined in-depth.
Student will have opportunities to administere, score and interpret various measures that provide information about
important individual differences and personality funtioning. This course will also cover the us eof normative data and
cultural factors during the assesement process. Students will gain experience with integrative report writing and the
communication of results and treatment recommendations. Students will be introduced to ethical and professional issues
related to personality assessment.

END

PSY 03710:

Intervention I: Foundational Clinical Skills

Prerequisites: Matriculation into the Ph.D. Program in Clinical Psychology.

The course will focus on an introduction to the pan-theoretical skills that may enhance the development of rapport in
context of a therapeutic relationship between therapist and client. This course will also review mental status exams, the
content areas of the initial intake interview, assessing for suicide and homicide risk, and basic conceptualization skills.
Students are expected to demonstrate these skills through use of roleplays and active learning processes.

END

PSY 03712:

Intervention II: Evidence-Based Interventions with Adults

Prerequisites: Grade of B- or better in PSY 03.710 Intervention I: Foundational Clinical Skills

This course is designed to be an overview of the major theoretical approaches to adult psychotherapy including: Behavioral,
Cognitive, Humanistic-Existential, and Psychodynamic traditions. The course will include didactic and experiential
components, and will expose students to the fundamental aspects of each theory and treatment approach. The ultimate goal
is for students to develop the skills and knowledge necessary to use techniques from these theories in a professional context.
This course is restricted to students matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03715:

Intervention III: Evidence-Based Interventions with Children & Adolescents

Prerequisites: Matriculation in Ph.D. Program in Clinical Psychology

This course provides an intensive overview of an ecological approach to child, adolescent, and family therapy. Starting with
the integration of a developmental perspective into clinical practice, the material in this course reviews different models of
therapy for children, adolescents, and families. The remainder of the course focuses on learning the evidence-based
interventions for specific disorders unique to childhood and adolescence. Issues of prevention of mental health issues in
children and adolescents are reviewed. This course is restricted to students matriculated into the doctoral program in
clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03717:

Advanced Cognitive-Behavioral Assessment and Treatment

Prerequisites: Matriculation in Ph.D. Program in Clinical Psychology

This class will allow students in the Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology to develop their skills in Cognitive-Behavioral
Treatment at a deeper level and learn to apply these skills to specific populations and settings. Additionally, this class will
allow students to learn specific treatment protocols for specific types of disorders and in non-traditional settings and with
unique populations.

END

PSY 03721:

Professional Proseminar I

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the Ph.D. Program in Clinical Psychology

The seminar is intended allow students to explore emerging areas and build competencies consistent with emerging trends
in clinical psychology. Additionally, students will be introduced to specific types of competencies that do not lend them self
to the comprehensiveness of a traditionally structured course. Finally, the course serves as a place for professional discourse
and growth for students as they progress through the program. This course is restricted to students matriculated into the
doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03722:

Professional Proseminar II

Prerequisites: Grade of Pass in PSY 03721

The seminar is intended allow students to explore emerging areas and build competencies consistent with emerging trends
in clinical psychology. Additionally, students will be introduced to specific types of competencies that do not lend them self
to the comprehensiveness of a traditionally structured course. Finally, the course serves as a place for professional discourse
and growth for students as they progress through the program. This course is restricted to students matriculated into the
doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03723:

Professional Proseminar III

Prerequisites: Grade of Pass in PSY 03722

The seminar is intended allow students to explore emerging areas and build competencies consistent with emerging trends
in clinical psychology. Additionally, students will be introduced to specific types of competencies that do not lend them self
to the comprehensiveness of a traditionally structured course. Finally, the course serves as a place for professional discourse
and growth for students as they progress through the program. This course is restricted to students matriculated into the
doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03724:

Professional Proseminar IV

Prerequisites: Grade of Pass in PSY 02723

The seminar is intended allow students to explore emerging areas and build competencies consistent with emerging trends
in clinical psychology. Additionally, students will be introduced to specific types of competencies that do not lend them self
to the comprehensiveness of a traditionally structured course. Finally, the course serves as a place for professional discourse
and growth for students as they progress through the program. This course is restricted to students matriculated into the
doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03725:

Professional Proseminar V

Prerequisites: Grade of Pass in PSY 03724

Students enrolled in Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology are required to enroll in one section of Professional
Proseminar every Fall and Spring semester during their first four years in the program. This is the fifth proseminar in that
sequence. The seminar is intended allow students to explore emerging areas and build competencies consistent with
emerging trends in clinical psychology. Additionally, students will be introduced to specific types of competencies that do
not lend them self to the comprehensiveness of a traditionally structured course. Finally, the course serves as a place for
professional discourse and growth for students as they progress through the program. This course is restricted to students
matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03726:

Professional Proseminar VI

Prerequisites: Grade of Pass in PSY 03725

Students enrolled in Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology are required to enroll in one section of Professional Pro
seminar every Fall and Spring semester during their first four years in the program. This is the sixth proseminar in that
sequence. The seminar is intended allow students to explore emerging areas and build competencies consistent with
emerging trends in clinical psychology. Additionally, students will be introduced to specific types of competencies that do
not lend them self to the comprehensiveness of a traditionally structured course. Finally, the course serves as a place for
professional discourse and growth for students as they progress through the program. This course is restricted to students
matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03727:

Professional Proseminar VII

Prerequisites: Grade of Pass in PSY 03726

Students enrolled in Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology are required to enroll in one section of Professional Pro
seminar every Fall and Spring semester during their first four years in the program. This is the seventh proseminar in that
sequence. The seminar is intended allow students to explore emerging areas and build competencies consistent with
emerging trends in clinical psychology. Additionally, students will be introduced to specific types of competencies that do
not lend them self to the comprehensiveness of a traditionally structured course. Finally, the course serves as a place for
professional discourse and growth for students as they progress through the program. This course is restricted to students
matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03728:

Professional Proseminar VIII

Prerequisites: Grade of 'Pass' in PSY 02.727 Professional Proseminar VII.

Students enrolled in Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology are required to enroll in one section of Professional
Proseminar every Fall and Spring semester during their first four years in the program. This is the eighth proseminar in that
sequence. The seminar is intended allow students to exploroe emerging area and build competencies consistent with
emerging trensd in clinical psychology. Additionally, students will be introduced to specific types of competencies that do
not lend themself to the comprehensiveness of a traditionally structured course. Finally, the course serves as a place for
professional discoursse and growth for student as they progress through the program. This cours is restricted to students
matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03740:

Professional, Ethical, and Legal Issues in Clinical Psychology

Prerequisites: Matriculation into the Clinical Psychology Ph.D. program.

This course covers ethical, legal, and professional issues involved in the discipline of psychology. Students will learn about
historical and contemporary issues shaping the field of psychology and the training/supervision requirements needed to
ethically/legally engage in various roles. Students will be challe.nged to actively apply the AP A principles and ethical
standards through a variety of exercises. State and Federal laws and regulations, including landmark legal cases, will be
examined in-depth. Students will consider the possible legal consequences of their behaviors/decisions. This course is
restricted to students matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03742:

Introductory Practicum

Prerequisites: Grade of B- or better in PSY 03.703Assessment II: Cognitive AND PSY 03.712 Intervention II: Evidence-Based Interventions with Adults

The Introductory Practicum is designed to let students develop intake, diagnostic, and assessment skills that they have
learned during the first year in the program. Students will first shadow one of the more advanced clinical students and assist
them in a clinical evaluation and assessment. Following this, student will then be expected to conduct their own evaluation
independently. Additional experiences may also be available. Students will also be expected to engage in regular supervision
provided by their practicum supervisor. This course is restricted to students matriculated into the doctoral program in
clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03744:

Foundational Practicum

Prerequisites: Grade of Pass in PSY 03742

The Practicum is designed to provide students with a vehicle for obtaining practical experience and training to become
competent clinical psychologists. Students will be assigned to either an internal or external practicum site. At that site, they
will conduct clinical evaluations, assessments, psychotherapy and other work appropriate to the role of a clinical
psychologist. The Foundation Practicum sequence is designed such that students will develop foundational clinical skills
related to their clinical work. Students will also be expected to engage in regular individual and group supervision provided
by their practicum supervisor. This course is restricted to students matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical
psychology.

END

PSY 03746:

Foundational Practicum II

Prerequisites: Grade of Pass in PSY 03744

The Practicum is designed to provide students with a vehicle for obtaining practical experience and training to become
competent clinical psychologists. Students will be assigned to either an internal or external practicum site. At that site, they
will conduct clinical evaluations, assessments, psychotherapy and other work appropriate to the role of a clinical
psychologist. The Foundation Practicum sequence is designed such that students will develop foundational clinical skills
related to their clinical work. Students will also be expected to engage in regular individual and group supervision provided
by their practicum supervisor. This course is restricted to students matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical
psychology.

END

PSY 03748:

Foundational Practicum III

Prerequisites: Grade of Pass in PSY 03746

The Practicum is designed to provide students with a vehicle for obtaining practical experience and training to become
competent clinical psychologists. Students will be assigned to either an internal or external practicum site. At that site, they
will conduct clinical evaluations, assessments, psychotherapy and other work appropriate to the role of a clinical
psychologist. The Foundation Practicum sequence is designed such that students will develop foundational clinical skills
related to their clinical work. Students will also be expected to engage in regular individual and group supervision provided
by their practicum supervisor. This course is restricted to students matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical
psychology.

END

PSY 03800:

Intermediate Practicum

Prerequisites: Grade of Pass in PSY 03748

The Practicum is designed to provide students with a vehicle for obtaining practical experience and training to become
competent clinical psychologists. Students will be assigned to either an internal or external practicum site. At that site, they
will conduct clinical evaluations, assessments, psychotherapy and other work appropriate to the role of a clinical
psychologist. The Intermediate Practicum sequence is designed such that students will develop increasingly more complex
and advanced clinical skills related to their clinical work. Students will also begin to develop skills consistent with their
chosen concentrations. In addition to their clinical work, students will also be expected to engage in regular individual and
group supervision provided by their practicum supervisor. This course is restricted to students matriculated into the
doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03802:

Intermediate Practicum II

Prerequisites: Grade of Pass in PSY 03800

The Practicum is designed to provide students with a vehicle for obtaining practical experience and training to become
competent clinical psychologists. Students will be assigned to either an internal or external practicum site. At that site, they
will conduct clinical evaluations, assessments, psychotherapy and other work appropriate to the role of a clinical
psychologist. The Intermediate Practicum sequence is designed such that students will develop increasingly more complex
and advanced clinical skills related to their clinical work. Students will also begin to develop skills consistent with their
chosen concentrations. In addition to their clinical work; students will also be expected to engage in regular individual and
group supervision provided by their practicum supervisor. This course is restricted to students matriculated into the
doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03804:

Intermediate Practicum III

Prerequisites: Grade of Pass in PSY 03802

The Practicum is designed to provide students with a vehicle for obtaining practical experience and training to become
competent clinical psychologists. Students will be assigned to either an internal or external practicum site. At that site, they
will conduct clinical evaluations, assessments, psychotherapy and other work appropriate to the role of a clinical
psychologist. The Intermediate Practicum sequence is designed such that students will develop increasingly more complex
and advanced clinical skills related to their clinical work. Students will also begin to develop skills consistent with their
chosen concentrations. In addition to their clinical work, students will also be expected to engage in regular individual and
group supervision provided by their practicum supervisor. This course is restricted to students matriculated into the
doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03812:

THESIS RESEARCH I

Prerequisites: Grade of B- or better in PSY 02. 706 Research Methods

The purpose of this course is for students to being to work with their research advisor on their master''s thesis. At the end
of this course, students are expected to have completed at least one draft of the Introduction and Method sections of their
research proposal. This course is restricted to students matriculated into the doctoral program in Clinical Psychology.

END

PSY 03814:

Thesis Research II

Prerequisites: Grade of \"Pass\" in PSY 03.812 Thesis Research I

The purpose of this course is for students to compete their work with their research advisor on their master\'s thesis. At
the end of this course, students are expected to have completed a final copy of their master\'s thesis. This course is
restricted to students matriculated into the doctoral program in Clinical Psychology.

END

PSY 03815:

Thesis Research

Prerequisites: Grade of B- or better in PSY 02706

The purpose of this course is for students to begin to develop an empirical project that will ultimately result in a
manuscript containing a relevant literature review (Introduction), research aims/hypotheses, a detailed accounting of how
information/data were collected or compiled (Method section), an accounting of the statistical analyses applied, and the
results, with a discussion portion that adequately explores the implications of the findings. This course is restricted to
students matriculated into the doctoral program in Clinical Psychology.

END

PSY 03820:

Advanced Practicum

Prerequisites: Grade of Pass in PSY 03804

The Practicum is designed to provide students with a vehicle for obtaining practical experience and training to become
competent clinical psychologists. Students will be assigned to either an internal or external practicum site. At that site, they
will conduct clinical evaluations, assessments, psychotherapy and other work appropriate to the role of a clinical
psychologist. The Advanced Practicum sequence is designed such that students will develop increasingly more complex and
advanced clinical skills related to their chosen concentration. Students will also have the opportunity to supervise other
students in the program to begin to develop their applied supervisory skills. In addition to their clinical work, students will
also be expected to engage in regular individual and group supervision provided by their practicum supervisor. This course is
restricted to students matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03822:

Advanced Practicum II

Prerequisites: Grade of Pass in PSY 03820 Advanced Practicum I

The Practicum is designed to provide students with a vehicle for obtaining practical experience and training to become
competent clinical psychologists. Students will be assigned to either an internal or external practicum site. At that site, they
will conduct clinical evaluations, assessments, psychotherapy and other work appropriate to the role of a clinical
psychologist. The Advanced Practicum sequence is designed such that students will develop increasingly more complex and
advanced clinical skills related to their chosen concentration. Students will also have the opportunity to supervise other
students in the program to begin to develop their applied supervisory skills. In addition to their clinical work, students will
also be expected to engage in regular individual and group supervision provided by their practicum supervisor. This course is
restricted to students matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03824:

Advanced Practicum Continuation

Prerequisites: Matriculation in doctoral program in clinical psychology and Completion of all credits required for the degree and Departmental and Dean’s office approval

Continuation of supervised advanced practicum experience in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03830:

Health Psychology

Prerequisites: Matriculation in Ph.D. Program in Clinical Psychology

This course will provide doctoral students with a foundation of clinical health psychology. Theories of health behaviors will
be introduced in relation to behavioral risk factors. Focus will be on assessment and treatment of primary behavioral
problems encountered in health psychology. This course is restricted to students matriculated into the doctoral program in
clinical psychology and is a required course.

END

PSY 03832:

Behavioral Medicine

Prerequisites: Matriculation in Ph.D. Program in Clinical Psychology

This course will expose students to the field of behavioral medicine and outline a behavior analytic approach to health
promotion, disease prevention, and treatment of chronic disease and other behavior-related illnesses. The principles of
behavior change will be reviewed and applied to a wide range of conditions including cardiovascular disease, obesity, drug
and alcohol abuse, diabetes, and other psychophysiological disorders. This course is restricted to students matriculated into
the doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03834:

Neuropsychological Assessment

Prerequisites: Grade of B- or better in PSY 03.703Assessment II: Cognitive

The course will emphasize the development of skills for recognizing and describing deficits in major aspects of cognitive
functioning. The relationship between neuropsychological assessment techniques and procedures and brain-behavior
relationships will be highlighted. Students will learn about the psychometric and qualitative aspects of the assessment
process along with the selection and use of appropriate normative comparison standards. Finally, the role of the
comprehensive neuropsychological assessment procedures in the evaluation of neurobehavioral disorders will be explored.
This course is restricted to students matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical psychology and is required of
students in Clinical Health Psychology.

END

PSY 03835:

Pediatric Psychology

Prerequisites: Matriculation in Ph.D. Program in Clinical Psychology

The purpose of this course is to examine the links between psychological and medical issues from infancy through
adolescence. Psychosocial aspects of specific medical problems and developmental, emotional, and behavioral disorders are
reviewed with an emphasis on evidence-based approaches to intervention and prevention. Students in this course are
required to present a relevant case from their practice. This course is restricted to students matriculated into the doctoral
program in clinical psychology and required for those in Clinical Health Psychology.

END

PSY 03838:

Health Care Models & Service Delivery

Prerequisites: Matriculation in Ph.D. Program in Clinical Psychology

Many individuals receiving care for behavior health conditions also have physical health conditions that require medical
attention, and vice versa. As a result, health care systems are evolving rapodly to improve coordination among health care
providers andn patients as well as to create models specific to rural and urban settings. In this course, students will learn how
to effectively collaborate in a primary care setting, the different models ofo practice that can be used to integrate physical
and behavioral health, and adaptations of these models for different settings. A final component of the course is discussion
of how the changing landscape of health care policy impacts the practice of psychology.

END

PSY 03860:

Internship

Prerequisites: Permission of instructor

The internship is a 12-month full-time commitment (2,000 hours) that is designed to provide an intensive clinical
experience expanding upon the required didactic coursework, clerkship, diagnostic practicum and therapy practicum
experiences. In some approved circumstances students may complete the requirement in 24 months. Students will typically
enroll in this noncredit course for each of the semesters that they are away. This course is restricted to students
matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 03900:

Advanced Seminar in Health Psychology and Behavioral Medicine

Prerequisites: Matriculation in Ph.D. Program in Clinical Psychology

Health Psychology and Behavioral Medicine represent disciplines that are dynamic and evolving. This content of this
seminar will vary each time it is offered with different classes addressing different advanced topic areas in Health Psychology
and Behavioral Medicine. The course is intended to be flexible so that different topics can be presented in response to
emerging trends in the field.

END

PSY 03902:

Advanced Seminar in Evidence Based Practice

Prerequisites: Matriculation in Ph.D. Program in Clinical Psychology

This seminar is intended to be flexible in content and responsive to emerging trends in healthcare and treatment of
individuals within a variety of different contexts. Cognitive-Behavioral treatments have been at the forefront of
evidence-based treatments and therefore the content of this advanced seminar may focus on developments within this
framework. However, the specific content of this seminar will be deliberately flexible and emerging evidence-base care
models and treatments, regardless ofthe theoretical foundations from which they emerge, will also be included. The focus ofthe class will be on helping students develop both a knowledge base and an ability to implement and critically evaluate
emerging treatments.

END

PSY 05206:

Social Psychology

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course examines the psychological, social and cultural factors that shape the social behavior of the individual. It
investigates such topics as affiliation, conformity, leadership, group processes; attitude formation and change; intergroup
cooperation and conflict. The primary focus is on the individual in social context.

END

PSY 05501:

Intervention Approaches In Psychology And Human Services

This course provides an overview of major intervention strategies used in diverse settings to address the counseling needs
of a variety of client populations. Factors affecting counselor efficacy are discussed. The course covers ethical principles and
practice standards in human service intervention, as well as strategies for measuring the effectiveness of intervention
approaches as applied to specific problems.

END

PSY 05502:

Fundamentals Of Drug And Alcohol Abuse And Dependency

This course provides an overview of fundamental issues concerning drug and alcohol use and addition. Topics covered
include psychological theories of addiction, psychopharmacology, and legal and ethical issues in the prevention and
treatment of addiction. The role of social context in drug and alcohol abuse prevention and treatment is discussed.

END

PSY 05512:

Positive Psychology

Prerequisites: Graduate level standing

What is a "good life?" What personal qualities and life experiences determine happiness? Are there things we can do that
increase satisfaction with life in a meaningful and consistent way? How do people overcome adversity and build hope,
strength and courage? In short, what really matters? Positive Psychology is an emerging area of psychology that attempts to
scientifically examine these timelines and central questions. Positive Psychology focuses on such topics as happiness, hope,
contentment, gratitude, creativity, optimism, values and resilience. This class will examine contemporary theory and
research in Positive Psychology, with the goal of exploring how we might build a more satisfying life for ourselves and for
others, and ultimately use this knowledge to improve organizations, schools, and other institutions for a healthier
community.

END

PSY 05610:

Social And Cultural Diversity

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the MA in CMHC, OR the CAGS in CMHC, OR the MA in School Psychology

This course will review studies that provide an understanding of the issues and trends in a multicultural and diverse society
and their influence on social thinking, social influence, and social relations. It will examine research dealing with the
dynamics and impact of socially constructed categories. These categories include culture, ethnicity, nationality, age, gender,
sexual orientation, mental and physical characteristics, education, family values, religious and spiritual values,
socioeconomic status and unique characteristics of individuals, couples, families, ethnic groups, and communities. The
implications of these issues for effective counseling is addressed.

END

PSY 05621:

Social Issues in Health and Wellness

Prerequisites: Matriculation into Ph.D. Program in Clinical Psychology

This course will focus on the ways in which prominent social psychological therories and perspectives have been tested and
applied in the context of health, disease, and wellnedd. Topics including cognitive dissonance, social comparison, social
perception, social influences, attitudes, communication and persuasion, relationships and social support, coping style,
self-efficacy, self-motivation and self-regulations will be examined for their relations with health and wellness. Specific ways
in which the broader socio-cultural environment has an impact on health behaviors, psysiology, and disese risk will also be
explored. The integrationn of theroretical and empirical social psychological contributions to health will be emphasized.

END

PSY 05651:

Interpersonal Theory And Psychotherapy

Prerequisites: Matriculation in CAGS in Clinical Mental Health Counseling OR Min of B- in PSY 01650

This course is designed to be an overview of interpersonal psychotherapy and theory. The course will include didactic and
experiential components, and will focus on developing the skills and knowledge necessary to use interpersonal techniques in
a professional context. In addition to these general skills, the course will also focus on the application of these techniques to
specific populations of interest within the psychological community.

END

PSY 05652:

Advanced Seminar In Clinical Practice

Prerequisites: Matriculation in CAGS in Clinical Mental Health Counseling OR Min of B- in PSY 01650

This advanced seminar in clinical practice is intended as a vehicle for bringing cutting edge information to current and
future practitioners engaged in clinical services. The topic(s) covered in a specific section will vary depending upon focus
chosen by the faculty member who is directing the class. However, the broad focus of each seminar will be on developing
knowledge and skills that directly benefit the students' ability to function as a mental health professional.

END

PSY 05700:

Social Psychology

Prerequisites: Matriculation in Ph.D. in Clinical Psychology Program

Course includes a survey of the field of social psychology with emphasis upon: basic psychological factors affecting social
behavior; attitudes; language and communication, society and culture; individual in relation to social groups and
organizations, group effectiveness and role behaviors. Emphasis will be placed upon major theories and concepts of social
psychology and relationships to other disciplines.

END

PSY 06533:

Tests And Measurements

The use, organization and interpretation of individual and groups standardized tests are studied. Other means of
evaluation, such as observations, inventories and use of cumulative records, will be included. Opportunity will be provided
for examining and evaluating these various evaluation instruments and techniques.

END

PSY 06625:

Assessment I: Psychometrics, Evaluation, & Treatment Planning

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the MA in CMHC, OR the CAG in CMHC

This course will introduce students to the practice of assessment in clinical and counseling contexts. The course will focus
on covering three aspects of clinical practice as it relates to assessment. The first is the evaluation of the psychometric:
properties of assessment tools and techniques. The second is using assessment data to develop a conceptual model of clients
and their problems, and the third is on the use of assessment data for treatment planning. Students will also be introduced to
ethical and professional issues related to assessment, and they will be expected to demonstrate their skills as part of their
classroom experience

END

PSY 06626:

Assessment II: Assessment Of Career/Vocational Interests, Treatments, & Programs

Prerequisites: PSY 06625 with B- or above

This course will introduce students to three unique applications of assessment principals within clinical and counseling
contexts. Specifically, students will learn about the use of the assessment process and instruments for the purpose of career
and vocational counseling. In addition, students will learn how to design and implement procedures aimed at assessing the
effectiveness of their services at an individual (treatments) and organizational (programs) level. Students will also be
introduced to ethical and professional issues related to assessment in these contexts, and they will be expected to
demonstrate their skills as part of their classroom experience.

END

PSY 06631:

Psychological Testing Of The Preschool Child

Practice in administration, analysis and evaluation of individual tests with infants and preschool children with emphasis
upon such tests as the Gessell Infant Intelligent Scale, Cattell Infant Intelligence Scale, Gessell Developmental Tests,
Minnesota Preschool Test and so forth. Tests will be administered under supervision with subsequent reports.

END

PSY 07714:

Statistics for Clinical Psychology I: Univariate

Prerequisites: Grade of B- or better in PSY 02. 706 Research Methods

This graduate level course provides an overview of basic statistical analyses frequently used in clinical
psychological research. Omnibus and focused hypothesis testing in one factor and multifactor designs using the General
Linear Model will be covered. Focus is on the appropriate applications and interpretations of these statistical analyses. This
course is restricted to students matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 07740:

Statistics for Clinical Psychology II: Multivariate and Advanced Statistics

Prerequisites: Grade of B- or better in PSY 07.714 Statistics for Clinical Psychology I: Univariate

This graduate level course provides an introduction to advanced multivariable statistical analyses frequently used in
psychological research, such as canonical correlation analysis, multivariate analysis of variance, multivariate multiple
regression, discriminant analysis, path analysis, factor analysis, logistic regression, multidimensional scaling, and cluster
analysis. Issues of time-series analysis and meta-analysis are also explored. Focus is on the appropriate applications and
interpretations ofthese statistical analyses in various areas of psychological research, including clinical, cognitive,
physiological, and social psychology. This course is restricted to students matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical
psychology.

END

PSY 07745:

Statistics in Clinical Psychology III - Advanced Multivariate

Prerequisites: PSY 07714 and PSY 07740 and matriculation into the PhD in Clinical Psychology program or other graduate programs, if prerequisites are met, or with Instructor approval.

Psychological research requires measuring many human characteristics (also known as "constructs") that are not
observable, such as depression or marital satisfaction. Accurate and reliable measurement is essential to understanding
statistical relationships between constructs. This course teaches students the basic principles of measurement theory and
how best to assess the reliability and validity of constructs, as well as what statistical models to use to appropriately model
measurement error. Topics covered include reliability, validity, classical test theory, item response theory, factor analysis,
and structural equation modeling.

END

PSY 09209:

Child and Adolescent Development

The content of this course covers the physical, cognitive, perceptual, linguistic, emotional, social, moral and sexual
development in humans, from the womb through adolescence. The influence of biological and sociocultural mechanisms
underlying development within these domains are also considered.

END

PSY 09210:

Adolescent Development

This course studies current theory and practice related to biological, cognitive, psychoanalytic, psychosocial, sexual and
moral development in adolescence. Students gain experience in developing beginning levels skills in selection and use of
evaluative techniques and in the use of activities appropriate to the various levels of adolescent development. This course is
intended for nonmajors and will not fulfill requirements of the Psychology major. Psychology majors must take Lifespan
Development (PSY 01308) in order to fulfill the requirements of the major.

END

PSY 09218:

Lifespan Development

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

This course provides an overview of human development across the lifespan, including physical, cognitive, social, and
personality development. All the major lifespan developmental theories and research will be presented, with heavy emphasis
on students' critical thinking about research. This course will cover both normative and atypical development across the
lifespan, including the major physical, mental health, and social problems occurring during the life span.

END

PSY 09305:

Developmental Psychopathology

Prerequisites: (PSY 01107 or PSY 01108) and PSY 09209 or PSY 09218

Using a developmental framework, the student will examine normal and abnormal behavior from infancy through
adolescence. Students will learn about the pathways to normal and abnormal behavior, explore the factors that place
children at risk for problems as well as the factors that protect children from adversity. Topics will include autism,
depression, anxiety, aggression, attentional difficulties, developmental delay, and physical illness.

END

PSY 09511:

Child Psychology

This course is designed to help professional educators and others concerned with facilitating healthful child development
to become more aware of the interrelationship of children's needs, potentialities and competencies. Attention is devoted to
the physical, social, mental and emotional growth of the child from conception to puberty.

END

PSY 09512:

Developmental Psychology Of Alcohol And Drug Abuse

This course addresses the psychological issues of drug and alcohol abuse in the context of the developmental psychology of
childhood and adolescence. Developmental considerations in prevention and intervention programming are emphasized.
The insight of developmental psychology concerning normal developmental processes are integrated with family systems
theory.

END

PSY 09560:

Lifespan Development

This course focuses on the developmental processes across the lifespan. Major theoretical perspectives are presented.
Attention is given to physical, cognitive, social and emotional development at each significant developmental periods.

END

PSY 09595:

Introduction To Counseling: Development Of Basic Skills

Prerequisites: Matriculation in MA in CMHC program

This course is a graduate level introduction to the foundation skills necessary for mental health counselors. Thus, there is a
minimum expectation of satisfactory understanding from certain core undergraduate areas (e.g.., Abnormal Psychology,
Personality Theories) and basic experiences with people who have mental illness. This course will cover a wide variety of
theoretical and applied topics including, the development of professional identity, observation skills, micro counseling skills
and developing a multicultural competence. This course will also review mental status exams, the content areas of the initial
intake interview, assessing for suicide and homicide risk, and conceptualizing clients. Students are expected to demonstrate
these skills through the use of role plays and videotapes.

END

PSY 09700:

Human Development

Prerequisites: Matriculation into Ph.D. Program in Clinical Psychology

In this course, students will understand development as a fusion of biological, cognitive, affective, and social aspects of
mind and behavior interacting in the context of culture. Students will learn about the theories and methodologies used to
study human development across the lifespan from prenatal development through adulthood. The interplay between
cognitive, affective, and social development will be emphasized, including such topics as perception, attention, memory,
language, problem solving, decision making and interpersonal relationships. This course is restricted to students
matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 10315:

Physiological Psychology

Prerequisites: PSY 01107 or PSY 01108

An introductory course in physiological psychology designed to give the student an understanding of the neural processes
mediating behavior. A study of advances in such areas as the neural coding of memory and learning; control of human
behavior and emotions through physiological changes; the environment as it affects the nervous system; psychobiology of
sex; psychosomatic illness; and instrumentation and techniques for investigating problems in physiological psychology.

END

PSY 10610:

Psychopharmacology And Biological Bases Of Behavior

Prerequisites: Matriculation in CAGS in Clinical Mental Health Counseling OR MA in Clinical Mental Health Counseling OR MA
in Clinical Mental Health Counseling and B- of more in PSY 01623

This course will provide an understanding of basic neurological mechanisms and how they are affected by psychotropic
medications. It includes a description of the functioning of neurotransmitters and their role in the etiology of some mental
illnesses. The course will review the major classes of psychotropic medications and their use for specific psychological
disorders. The integration of psychotropic medications into best practice treatment plans and case management is
discussed.

END

PSY 10630:

Biological Bases of Behavior

Prerequisites: Matriculation into Ph.D.Program in Clinical Psychology

This course examines the structure and function of the nervous system, from the cellular to the behavioral level. Topics will
include cell types, neuronal membrane electrical properties, synaptic properties, neurobiology of the senses, control of
movement, development of the nervous system, and the effects of the nervous system on learning, memory and other
psychological behaviors. Current research and animal models will also be discussed. Students will be expected to become
proficient in both the basic biological mechanisms as they affect psychological functioning, and in current research in
improving psychological functioning through neural and biological interventions. This course is restricted to students
matriculated into the doctoral program in clinical psychology.

END

PSY 22507:

Development And Learning

This course is an introduction to the basic theories, vocabulary and principles of developmental psychology. Special
attention is focused upon the role of environmental and educational factors in development, and the application of learning
theory to modify behavior. Age-appropriate behaviors expected of children and adolescents are described.

END

PSY 22512:

Educational Psychology

The dynamics involved in the process of learning are emphasized. An objective of the course is a consideration of the ways
psychology can be of value in facilitating the teaching-learning process. Such topics as formulating objectives, motivation
and evaluation of learning are considered.

END

PSY 22586:

Psychology Of Motivation And Learning

An intensive study of the basic theories of learning and current research in motivation and learning is emphasized in this
course. Stress is placed upon the significance of these theories and investigations for educational practices.

END

PSY 22600:

Seminar I In Applied Research: School Psychology

This course will concentrate on the latest developments in the field of educational psychology, emphasizing theoretical and
research findings. An introduction to the field of school psychology will also be included. Students will be expected to
complete a project to demonstrate scholarly and professional awareness in the field.

END

PSY 22601:

Seminar II In Applied Research: School Psychology

This course will concentrate on the latest developments in the field of educational psychology, emphasizing theoretical and
research findings. An introduction to the field of school psychology will also be included. Students will be expected to
complete a project to demonstrate scholarly and professional awareness in the field.

END

PSY 22602:

Applied Research: School Psychology

END

ADV 04330:

Introduction To Advertising

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201

The course provides an overview, including techniques and terminology that are useful in the professional world. Topics
include history of advertising, marketing, ethics, law, consumer behavior, print and electronic media, and retail and
corporate advertising. The course combines theory of advertising with practical applications.

END

ADV 04360:

Integrated Marketing Communication

Prerequisites: PR 06350 and ADV 04330

This course explores the expanded as well as the communication portion of the organization's business and marketing
plans. Emphasis is placed on how to translate marketing strategies into a well-defined and seamless communication program
directed at all of the organization's publics.

END

MAPR 01511:

Writing Speeches

Students will learn how to research the audience, how to locate information and how to write various kinds of speeches.
Evaluating the effectiveness of a written speech will be covered.

END

MAPR 01522:

Persuasion Techniques

END

MAPR 01524:

Fundraising And Development

Students will learn how fundraising and development offices are organized, what research and case studies say about
fundraising and development and how to plan and evaluate campaigns.

END

MAPR 01528:

Communication with Special Publics

This course will show students how to recognize the characteristics of special publics such as blacks and other minorities,
women, senior citizens, youth influentials and the community power structure. Featured will be communication methods
and strategies of communicating effectively with these special publics.

END

MAPR 01530:

Internal Communications In Organizations

Both lateral and vertical communications will be studied in various organizations. The importance of good internal
communications on effective external communications will be highlighted. Ideas, plans and methods of initiating and
maintaining an effective internal communications program will be emphasized.

END

MAPR 01531:

Media Planning And Buying

Students will learn how to devise a media plan that will most effectively carry their message to the target audiences. They
will gain practice identifying audiences, developing a media budget, devising a media work plan and buying media.

END

MAPR 01533:

Crisis Public Relations

Students will learn how to anticipate crises and how to plan a communications program that works during a crisis.
Working with internal and external audiences before, during and after a crisis will be covered.

END

MAPR 01534:

Small Group Communications

Addressed in this course will be the definition of small group communication; why to study small group communications;
and communication factors such as group size, spatial arrangement in face-to-face groups, status, rank, and power;
leadership; group climate; cooperation, competition, and conflict in group climate; and communication networks.

END

MAPR 01535:

Interpersonal Communications

Considered in this course will be communication between two people. Models of communications developed by
authorities in the field will show how the communications process works. Featured will be the concepts of communications
such as the frame-of-reference, empathy, authenticity, interpersonal trust, and feeling content. The course will help students
understand some of the communication barriers encountered in day-to-day work.

END

MAPR 01536:

Public Relations Law And Ethics

The course will acquaint students with the substance and interpretation of the "Code of Professional Standards for the
Practice of Public Relations,'' which is the official code of the Public Relations Society of America. During the course
students will become familiar with the major laws governing broadcasting, publishing and speaking. A key ingredient of the
course will be the opportunity for students to develop personal ethical stances about communications and to refine their
skills at judging ethically unclear situations in communications.

END

MAPR 01537:

Contemporary Public Relations Challenges

This course will mix lecture with seminar discussions on key issues of the day affecting the practice of public relations.
Classic problem-solving and decision-making designs will be part of the discussion about the contemporary events.
Individual, on-the-job problems from class participants will be discussed and solved in case study fashion. (Using the
computer for PR purposes will be stressed.)

END

MAPR 01538:

Legislative Liaison For Public Relations Practitioners

From this course students will learn how to identify from government officials and records information that affects
organizations; to work effectively with government officials at all levels, local, state and federal; to promote legislation that
would be helpful to an organization; and to obtain cooperation from government officials and groups.

END

MAPR 01541:

Understanding And Writing Grants And Proposals

Students will learn where to get grants, how proposals are evaluated and how to write and present proposals.

END

MAPR 01547:

Graduate Strategic Writing

This course consists of five writing modules with varying credits: MAPR01.506-Newswriting, MAPR01.507-Tightening
Writing and Translating from Jargon to Comfortable Language, MAPR01.509-Writing Leads That Get Attention,
MAPR01.510-Writing Reports, Letters and Memos, and MAPR01.513-Feature Writing. Instruction is given in the five
modules in journalistic writing and editing. Students will learn how to prepare effective news releases, to edit the way
professional writers do, to gain readers' attention by writing effective leads, to write reports, memos and letters that
communicate effectively, and to prepare and place feature stories for newspapers, journals and magazines. Description of
individual modules is given under each respective number.

END

MAPR 01548:

Graduate Writing Basics

In todays fast-action world, you are required to write accurate, hard-hitting communication at a moments notice. This
course provides proctical guidelines for students who need to write with speed, precision and power.

END

MAPR 01550:

Introduction to Graduate Strategic Communication Research

A study of the research process as it relates to the task of writing a communication thesis. Emphasis will be placed on the
four standard, accepted types of research. Students will examine the unique purposes, features, procedures and uses of each
research type, using the information as the basis for creating a thesis proposal.

END

MAPR 01551:

Graduate Strategic Communication Overview

This is an overview of the relationships between an organization and its publics. Development of understanding among
them is stressed. The course presents the theoretical foundation of public relations and outlines techniques of structured
communications between an organization and its publics.

END

MAPR 01553:

Graduate Case Studies In Public Relations

This course reviews and predicts how organizations solve their PR challenges. Through case studies, students evaluate
issues, audiences and strategic elements of each situation. Students work through problems in seminar situations and write
position papers.

END

MAPR 01554:

Planning Special Events

This course will survey the problems and solutions surrounding the staging of special events and workshops in the practice
of public relations. events like ground-breaking news conferences, dignitary visits, seminars, anniversary celebrations and
many more pose planning and implementation problems for the practitioner. Students will anticipate and solve these
problems and have the option to make plans of their own for upcoming events. Included will be budgeting, involving the
audience in planning, choosing sites, working with speakers and evaluating the event workshop.

END

MAPR 01555:

Persuasive And Feature Writing

Students will learn in this module additional technical skills in modifying opinion through writing. Students will receive a
personal checklist of their persuasive writing needs during the course. In addition, students will learn how to prepare and
place feature stories for newspapers, journals, and magazines.

END

MAPR 01556:

Organizational Public Relations Management & Counseling

This three credit course will acquaint students with many aspects of the public relations profession (or review for some).
Students will learn about the composition of PR departments, the steps necessary to manage a public relations department
and accepted methods to establish budgets in a public relations shop. Students will be expected to analyze the economic
realities surrounding the practice of public relations in a variety of settings. For the first time, there will be a concentration
on public relations counseling, media training and rehearsal, and media relations.

END

MAPR 01557:

Using Electronic Media In Public Relations

This course will acquaint students with the techniques of producing video for electronic media and its proper use in a
public relations program within a given budget. They will become familiar with the different requirements for electronic
media production. Students will also study the steps involved in applying this method: choosing appropriate film subjects
and film principles, properly conducting the planning of a story and performing the right production practices.

END

MAPR 01558:

Integrated Marketing Communication

The relationship of marketing, public relations and advertising will be explored. Marketing, PR and advertising
techniques-including cost-effective ways of reaching key audiences-will be discussed, as will positioning, testing and
evaluating.

END

MAPR 01559:

Strategic Public Affairs

The course examines theory and practice of strategic political communications, including depth study of persuasion
campaigns, use of propaganda in public affairs, and the role of communicators in engaging the public in the critical public
policy issues.

END

MAPR 01560:

Public Affairs Overview

This course is an overview of the ethical and legal means used by public affairs representatives in influencing the political,
legislative, and regular process of government. Emphasis is placed on demonstrating strong writing and research skills, as
well as developing effective communication plans.

END

MAPR 01561:

Graduate Strategic Writing II

A continuation of the graduate PR writing course, this course examines the more demanding writing projects encountered
by the PR practitioner. The course polishes writing and editing skills to better prepare students for a professional position.
Students will learn creative techniques required to successfully prepare different materials. They will write features for
newsletters and magazines and prepare video/film scripts. They will also write and edit persuasive copy for marketing
communication material for advertorials, position papers, op-ed pieces and speeches.

END

MAPR 01562:

Integrated Marketing Communication Online Overview

This course will familiarize students with the concepts and processes of Integrated Marketing Communication. By
examining case studies, students will learn how the different marketing communication elements work together to enhance
the marketing function and to achieve maximum impact. Finally, students will obtain a fundamental understanding of how
to include IMC as a crucial element in the planning process.

END

MAPR 01563:

Research, Messaging and Audience Online Analysis

Students will study various research methodologies in this course. They will learn to develop measurable research
objectives, select appropriate methodologies and analyze data. The course also introduces students to a range of qualitative
and quantitative research questions and to the tools for answering them. These include secondary searches; individual and
group interviews; media audience measurement; market structure; segmentation and usage studies; strategy, concept and
positioning research; syndicated and custom message pre/post tests and tracking studies; and test markets. Students will also
develop questionnaires and examine research methods such as personal and telephone interviews, focus panels, mail surveys,
probability and quota sampling, and experimental design.

END

MAPR 01565:

Integrated Marketing Communication and New Media

END

MAPR 01566:

Public Affairs Advertising

This 5-week module will teach students the basic principles of advertising in the public area. Topics will include using
advertising to set the agenda of a public policy debate; how to apply the lessons of product advertising; conditions that
enhance the effectiveness of advertising; issue advertising as protected speech; the importance of a good working
relationship with advertising agencies; advertising in a crisis; the role of research in advertising; and evaluating the
effectiveness of public affairs advertising. The module will also convey real-world examples from practitioners to present to
the student a broad understanding of public affairs advertising.

END

MAPR 01567:

Public Affairs And Labor Communication

This 5-week module concentrates on the role public affairs plays in an organization's relationships with its employees and
the unions which represent them. Students will explore the relationship between management, unions and labor, and the
role of public affairs in those relationships. Topics include: eommunity organizing; employee communications; building and
maintaining political support; federal and state regulations regarding employee relations; media relations; the "Managerial
Creed;" and the legal aspects of labor/employee communication. Students will gain thorough knowledge by learning about
current cases.

END

MAPR 01568:

Graduate Strategic Visual Communication

The ability to conceive, produce and deploy rich visual imagery is now a core requirement for advertising and PR
practitioners. To help students prepare for this rapidly evolving field, this class explores how and why visual media have
overtaken text-based content. Through practical, hands-on individual experiences and class projects, it provides a
framework for understanding the different types of visual media and their participants, choosing the right tools, and
devising the strategies to succeed in this new digital era.

END

MAPR 01569:

Graduate Strategic Case Studies & Public Relations Planning

This course reviews and predicts how organizations solve their PR challenges. Through case studies, students evaluate
issues, audiences and strategic elements of each situation. Students work through problems in seminar situations and write
position papers. Students will learn the classic ways to construct a public relations plan, including writing goals and
objectives, establishing campaign themes, and strategies, developing PERT and GANTT charts, specifying plan details and
learning how to monitor and evaluate the plan. Students will also learn how to write a proposal, how to identify the real
communications problem, and how to counsel management about policy related to the success of the plan.

END

MAPR 01570:

Graduate Media Metrics and Analytics

This course provides a thorough grounding in how media consumption is measured (metrics) and utilized (analytics) by
media organizations and independent professionals. The course spans traditional circulation of print publications,
broadcast, cable, and radio ratings, website traffic measures, social media statistics and advertising data. Media Metrics and
Analytics examines the types of measures that, for example, are now commonly displayed on monitors in newsrooms as a
way to gauge the success of a story, or are used by entrepreneurs to evaluate the overall success of various media.

END

MAPR 01575:

Independent Study-Public Relations
.

END

MAPR 01610:

Internship In Public Relations

This course requires on-the-job apprenticeship in a public relations program that involves a wide variety of tasks. The
internship is overseen by a public relations professional on the job and by a PR professor.

END

MAPR 01620:

Strategic Communication Seminar

Prerequisites: MAPR 01547 (allows concurrent enrollment), MAPR 01550 (allows concurrent enrollment), and MAPR 01551 (allows concurrent enrollment).

Each student will be required to develop a major communication project on any phase of educational or corporate
communications. The project will display appropriate research procedures and skill in communications. Some seminar
sessions will be used to provide additional communication background for students. Students are required to complete both
the fall and spring seminars for the program. The fall semester is a prerequisite for the spring semester. The student must
have completed or be enrolled in Public Relations Overview (MAPR 01551), Techniques of Communication (MAPR 01547),
and Intro to Communications Research (MAPR 01550).

END

MAPR 06505:

Special Topics In Public Relations

Special topics provide an opportunity for graduate students to explore an emerging issue in the field of public relations in a
timely fashion. The course presents an opportunity to study the topic under the guidance of an expert in the particular field
or issue.

END

MAPR 06515:

Online Public Relations

Public relations has moved to the Internet, and in the process online communication skills have become essential to online
and offline public relations practice. Online public relations explores the practical tools necessary for using the internet in
public relations and provides a broad overview for creating an online newsroom.

END

MAPR 98503:

School Public Relations

This is an overview of the relationships of the school and its various publics. The public character of the school and the
need for public understanding of the school are considered. Development of understanding between the school and the
community is stressed.

END

MAPR 99523:

Polls & Surveys

END

PR 05350:

Strategic Communication Overview

Strategic Communication Overview will provide a comprehensive look at the integration of public relations, advertising
and marketing communication. The class develops the role of public relations and advertising in the strategic
communication environment. It addresses research, public opinion, the media, as well as law and ethics.

END

PR 06301:

Basic Public Relations Writing

Basic Public Relations Writing introduces students to the tasks of writing and editing required in a public relations
position. Students will learn to write for both print and electronic media, develop their skills in grammar, syntax and usage
and learn to copy edit their own work and the work of others.

END

PR 06310:

Introduction To Public Relations/Advertising Research

Prerequisites: 60 credits required

The course studies both qualitative and quantitative research methods necessary for success in the fields of public relations
and advertising. Emphasis is placed on evaluation of secondary searches, individual and group interviews, media audience
measurements, market structure, segmentation and usage studies, and tracking studies.

END

PR 06350:

Introduction To Public Relations

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course explores the history and role of public relations in society. Students explore mass media, persuasion, publicity,
radio and television. Students examine special events, crisis management, communication techniques, research and
evaluation, communication law and ethics. Basically a theory course, this introduction also applies ideas practically to real
clients and organizations.

END

PR 99362:

Public Opinion

Prerequisites: PR 06310

This course includes the nature and role of public opinion, the dynamics of public opinion processes and the numerous
factors which shape or influence opinion. Students examine the mass media, evaluating their roles as molders and reflectors
of public opinion. Major topics that influence public opinion are discussed, including gratifications, agenda setting,
knowledge gaps, censorships and propaganda.

END

RTF 03270:

Film History to 1940

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and RTF 03275

Students trace the development of motion pictures as an art form from the 1890s to 1941. Representative selections from
the various genres are screened, then discussed in terms of art, technique, content and historical perspective, as well as
directorial style. Part I is not a prerequisite for Part II; these courses may be taken in any order; students may opt for one or
both courses.

END

RTF 03271:

Film History Since 1940

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112

This course is a continuation of RTF 03.270 with emphasis on contemporary genres and implications. Students trace the
modern cinema from 1941 to the present. Students may take Part II prior to Part I; although the content is chronological,
Part I is not a prerequisite for Part II.

END

RTF 03275:

Applied Media Aesthetics: Sight, Sound And Story

This course offers students an introduction to the aesthetic concepts as applied directly to radio, television, and film
media. Using examples from these media, students will study, discuss, and analyze design and composition elements as they
apply to the production process. A basic vocabulary of aesthetic terminology will be assembled and students will be
responsible for understanding and applying those terms through various written and visual assignments.

END

RTF 03295:

Introduction To New Media

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 AND COMP 01112

Introduction to New Media surveys emerging digital communication and entertainment media and teaches new media
from the perspective of the producer. Students will discuss the evolution, social and historical implications, and production
of media forms with an emphasis on social networking, user generated and other web media.

END

RTF 03393:

Screenwriting 1: Writing the Short - WI

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112

The course covers the basic technical requirements for writing movie scripts and the problems of adapting material to
screen and script analysis. By viewing contemporary movies and studying plotting, point-of-view, character creation and
dialogue, students learn how a film script is put together and write an original script.

END

RTF 03394:

New Media Production

Prerequisites: RTF 03295

This is the second in a sequence of three courses in the Interactive Media specialization. Students will apply content
production skills from radio, television, and film to the production of hybrid media. Students work in teams to plan, design,
produce, and test multimedia products. Students are expected to demonstrate a high level of professionalism in completing
all work on schedule to professional standards and in their interactions.

END

RTF 10510:

Writing for Television

Writing for Television provides students with an advanced understanding of the major methodologies and practices
central to television writing. The course is designed to provide students with the skills necessary to conduct graduate-level
writing in the field of Television Studies, journalism and scriptwriting. The course offers in-depth explorations of key
approaches foundational to academic and critical writing, journalism and scriptwriting. Students will develop conceptual and
practical frameworks for designing and conducting graduate-level Television Studies assignments.

END

RTF 10511:

Research Methods in Television Studies

Research Methods in Television Studies provides students with an advanced understanding of the major theories and
research methodologies central to the field of Television Studies. The course is designed to provide students with the skills
necessary to conduct graduate-level research in the field of Television Studies. The course offers an in-depth exploration of
key scholarly approaches foundational to television history, criticism, and theory, encompassing the range of ways that
televisual media has been understood within the discipline. Students will develop conceptual and practical frameworks for
designing and conducting graduate-level Television Studies research projects.

END

RTF 10512:

Television Genre and History

Television Genre and History provides students with an advanced understanding of the major theories and research
methodologies central to an historical study of Genre. The course is designed to provide students with the skills necessary to
conduct graduate-level research in the field of Television Studies, history and genre. The course offers an in-depth
exploration of key scholarly approaches foundational to a study of the development of genre theory and its application to
Television Studies. Students will develop conceptual and practical frameworks for designing and conducting graduate-level
Television Studies research projects.

END

RTF 10513:

The Global Television Industry

The Global Television Industry provides students with a comprehensive understanding of the historical foundations of the
global television industry and the ability to identify major shifts in the current international landscape of television markets.
The course is designed to provide students with the skills necessary to conduct graduate-level research in the field of Global
Television Studies. The course offers an in-depth exploration of key scholarly approaches foundational to the study of the
global television industry, encompassing the range of ways that international television markets have adopted international
products and adapted them to their home market. Students will develop conceptual and practical frameworks for designing
and conducting graduate-level Television Studies projects.

END

RTF 10514:

Identity on Television

Identity on Television provides students with an advanced understanding of the relationship between identity formation
and its representation on television, whether personal, social/cultural or national. The course introduces students to various
theoretical approaches to identity and is designed to provide students with the skills necessary to apply these approaches to
specific examples from the international television market. The course offers in depth exploration of key theoretical
approaches to identity formation and how it is subsequently represented in television products. Students will develop
conceptual and practical frameworks for designing and conducting graduate-level Television Studies written assignments.

END

RTF 10516:

Television Auteurs

Television Auteurs provides students with an advanced understanding of the relationship between the study of the auteur,
television writing and the role of the showrunner in the contemporary television period. The course introduces students to
various theoretical approaches to the television auteur and is designed to provide students with the skills necessary to apply
these approaches to specific examples from the contemporary international television landscape. The course offers in depth
exploration of key debates and approaches to the auteur theory and how the concept of the authorship has subsequently
been developed in the field of Television Studies. Students will develop conceptual and practical frameworks for designing
and conducting graduate-level Television Studies written assignments.

END

RTF 10517:

THE WRITER'S ROOM

THE WRITER’S ROOM provides students with an advanced understanding of screenwriting industry standards and
practices for streamers, networks, and web-based productions. The course further offers an in-depth exploration of how the
“rooms” of seminal and award-winning series are constructed and run. Using a workshop model, assignments and exercises
of increasing importance will lead the class through the development of an original series. Students will execute individual
and group research, and splinter into smaller units to write full episodes of this original show. The semester culminates with
table reads of the season’s first three episodes.

END

RTF 10518:

The Evolution of Quality Television

The purpose of this course is to trace the development of some of television’s most ambitious and distinctive series with an
intense focus on the notion of quality. Students will be instructed on the history of quality TV, trace the development and
evolution of distinct forms of quality programming, learn about different cultural notions of quality and understand how this
designation has developed and changed over time. The course offers in-depth explorations of key approaches. Students will
learn to contextualize and situate their research in relation to broader writing styles as well as wider disciplinary traditions
and debates in order to develop original projects that address varying conceptual and practical frameworks suitable forgraduate-level Television Studies assignments.

END

RTF 10519:

Women and Television

This course provides students with an advanced understanding of key issues, theories, and analytical approaches related to
the study of women/gender and Television in order to provide students with the skills necessary to conduct advanced,
graduate-level research in the field of Feminist Television Studies. The course offers an in-depth investigation into key
theoretical approaches to women’s positioning within society and how this relates to their place within the television
industry. Students will analyze the construction of women and gender in television in relation to: institutions of production
and how television produces, reproduces, and/or challenges gendered power relations in the media industries, as well as
issues of authorship and representation and how gendered working practices impact on women’s representation onscreen.
Starting from an historical overview of the evolution of women’s roles within society, the course will then turn to the
television industry specifically in order to unpack how gendered expectations impact on women’s roles within television.
The course will primarily focus on the US television industry but will also include overviews of European practices in order
to uncover how societal expectations impact on representational practices.

END

RTF 10520:

Graduate Audio Production

Graduate Audio Production teaches the basic concepts of sound as it relates to the medium of radio, television, and film.
Through coordinated reading assignments and in-class listening, students will become familiar with various styles of
documentary audio production. Students will also study the historical evolution of film sound and music through lectures,
viewing, and in-class discussion. Students will be expected to integrate this information into the production of professional
audio documentaries and sound design for film.

END

RTF 10521:

Graduate Documentary Production

Graduate Documentary Production is a graduate course where students lacking will gain knowledge and skills to produce
documentary projects. Students will explore the culture of the media professional through a series of group assignments that
stress productive collaboration, objective criticism and analysis, professional ethics, and time management. Students will
develop competencies in the processes and equipment of television field production, experiencing all phases of
pre-production, production, and post-production as they research, write, shoot and edit creative projects.

END

RTF 10522:

Graduate Film Production

Graduate Film Production is a graduate course where students are introduced to the technological, organizational and
aesthetic production competencies for shooting narrative films using color, lights and sound. Readings will emphasize
cinematic visual storytelling conventions. Homework assignments will emphasize preproduction, previsualization and
production coordination of short narrative films. Students will produce a series of production assignments culminating in
the production of a short narrative film.

END

RTF 10523:

Graduate Screenwriting

Graduate Screenwriting is an intensive writing workshop where students learn the basics of dramatic writing for the
screen. The first half of the course is built around screenings, lectures, discussions and exercises where students explore the
fundamentals of daily writing, dramatic structure, visual writing, characterization, dialog and proper screenplay formatting.
Film analysis will focus on classic and contemporary shorts and feature films. The second half of the semester focuses on the
development, and re-writing of a narrative short film based on an incident from a longer feature screenplay outline.

END

RTF 10524:

Master's Project

Prerequisites: RTF 10510, RTF 10511, and RTF 10512

The Master’s Project will culminate in a 10,000word project offering students the opportunity to demonstrate specialized
subject knowledge as well as excellent research and writing skills learned over the course of the Master’s program. This final
piece of work will utilize students’ particular expertise in their chosen pathway and will take the form of an academic thesis,
a longer form of piece of journalistic writing or a short script suitable for television production. Supervisors most suited to
students’ chosen subject area, topic and skillset will be assigned by Faculty at the outset of the course. Students will be
offered weekly workshop sessions and/or individual meetings with their allocated supervisors to guide them through this,
their final written assignment.

END

RTF 10525:

Rhetoric of Reality TV

This course examines rhetorical dimensions of the reality television genre. Students will analyze the various subgenres
constituting Reality TV, with particular attention given to how such shows critique and/or validate certain identity
positions in Western culture, including gender, gender identity, race, class, sexual orientation, and regional identity.
Students will explore concepts of authenticity, truth, and suspension of disbelief as they relate to a television format based in
documenting the “real.”

END

RTF 10526:

Script To Screen

Script to Screen provides students with an advanced understanding of the major methodologies and practices central to the
work of a directing and producing narrative television. The course is designed to provide students with the skills to prepare
to produce or direct narrative scripted material for television. The course offers in-depth explorations of key approaches to
directing both multi-camera live productions and single camera film style productions. Students will develop conceptual and
practical frameworks for designing and producing shooting plans for narrative scripted content. Students will develop an
appreciation the key role of the director in preparing a television script for the production process.

END

RTF 10527:

Episodic Screenwriting I: Creating the Series

This graduate-level writing workshop course explores the form of episodic screenwriting, specifically serialized narrative
programs. Students analyze a variety of episodic content; design a complete “show bible,” a document that maps a series and
provides a clear sense of its characters, tone, structure and narrative trajectory; create a polished visual pitch presentation;
and write the first act of a pilot script.

END

RTF 10528:

Episodic Screenwriting II: Writing the Pilot

Prerequisites: RTF 10527

This graduate-level writing workshop course explores the form of episodic screenwriting, specifically serialized narrative
programs. Students analyze a variety of episodic content; expand the “show bible,” a document created in Graduate Episodic
Screenwriting 1 that maps a series and provides a clear sense of its characters, tone, structure and narrative trajectory, with
more in-depth episode breakdowns; revise the visual pitch presentation created in Graduate Episodic Screenwriting 1; and
write and revise a complete hour-long pilot script or two half-hour episode scripts.

END

RTF 10530:

Master's Project II

Corequisite(s): RTF 10524

The Master’s Project will culminate in a 10,000word project offering students the opportunity to demonstrate specialized
subject knowledge as well as excellent research and writing skills learned over the course of the Master’s program. This final
piece of work will utilize students’ particular expertise in their chosen pathway and will take the form of an academic
dissertation, a longer piece of non-fictional critical writing or a short script suitable for television production. Supervisors
most suited to students’ chosen subject area, topic and skillset will be assigned by Faculty at the outset of the course.
Students will be offered weekly workshop sessions and/or individual meetings with their allocated supervisors to guide them
through this, their final written assignment.

END

EDTC 33510:

Emerging Technology Tools and the Curriculum

The philosophical, psychological, sociological and educational implications of the computer and its impact on the public
school curriculum are explored. Current relationships between theory and practice, along with future technologies, are
examined.

END

EDTC 33531:

Coding and Logical Thinking to Support Learning

The course prepares educators to focus on exploring rationales, resources, and strategies of incorporating coding,
programming, and logical thinking in P-12 classrooms. Educators will not only become familiar with the basics of coding and
logical thinking, but they will also research case studies and evaluate best practices, available resources, and curriculum. The
content of this graduate-level course will focus on the development of the educators’ understanding of ways to effectively
use best-practice teaching strategies with respect to coding, programming, and logical thinking so as to support P-12
learning.

END

EDTC 33540:

Developing Online Resources for P-12 Students

The course prepares educators to develop online lessons and resources for P-12 students in classroom and online learning
environments. Participants will learn the theory and practice of P-12 online teaching and learning and explore effective
strategies to develop useful web-based lessons and resources. Emphasis is placed on understanding the trend of P-12 online
education, selecting effective tools for online instruction, engaging students through collaborative activities, and developing
and evaluating online resources. Participants will become familiar with technological tools for designing online resources
and develop knowledge of online resources for teaching and student use.

END

EDTC 33550:

Learning through Gamification

The course prepares educators to focus on the development of the educators’ understanding of ways to effectively use
gamification and digital game-based learning in the P-12 classroom. In addition, educators will apply gamification principles
and best practice strategies for digital games in their teaching as exemplified by a unit they create as well as an educational
digital game that they will design and plan. Educators will also advocate for the integration of gamification into other
subjects within their educational organization. This course will benefit teachers and educators who are seeking to
implement gamification and digital gaming to support P-12 student learning in their own classrooms and educational
institutions.

END

EDTC 33561:

Leading for Effective Educational Technology

The content of this graduate-level course will focus on developing the educators’ understanding of educational technology
leadership in P-12 schools. Building upon past research on strategies, theories, and frameworks that best support learning
through educational technology leadership, the educators will create work products that can be used to advocate for
effective educational technology in their own P-12 educational organization. Major topics of this course include the
following: navigating change, effective infusion of educational technology, and best practices of educational technology
leadership.

END

EDTC 33570:

Researching and Analyzing Educational Technology

The course is designed to induct teachers into educational technology research. The primary goal of this course is to
introduce instructional system design (ISD) theories and frameworks and the types of educational technology research in
P-12 and higher education settings. Participants will review the instructional system design processes and explore both
qualitative and quantitative research studies of educational technology in P-12 and higher education settings. Participants
will develop their sills in analyzing and summarizing literature in educational technology.

END

EDTC 33580:

Introduction To Educational Technology

This course is intended for educators at all levels who place a high value on successful teaching and learning. The purpose
of the course is to help educators incorporate media and technologies for learning into their repertoire--to use them as
learning tools. The course will draw examples from elementary, secondary, and postsecondary education as well as corporate
training and development. This course will provide the initial opportunities necessary to begin technology infusion in the
school curriculum.

END

EDTC 33584:

Digital Citizenship in 21st Century Schools

The primary objective of this course is to provide a comprehensive introduction to desktop publishing using desktop
publishing programs that can be used in the educational setting. This course provides a hands-on approach to desktop
publishing using both high-end and low-end publishing programs. The experiences in this course will help students to
become more involved with the visual impact of their ideas on the readers. Students will learn to integrate ideas with words,
typestyle, graphics and other features involved in the production of publications with a high level of visual impact.

END

EDTC 33585:

Internet In The Classroom

Prerequisites: EDTC 33.580

This course provides and introduction to the Internet emphasizing its value in teaching and learning. In this course
students will discover how to use some basic Internet navigation programs to locate and gather information from the
Internet. Lessons will include finding and subscribing to listserv lists in education, using ERIC online, accessing and
employing web search engines., locating and downloading files, handling files with e-mail, discovering and capturing
multimedia elements on the web, developing a personal web page, and analyzing the implication of the Internet for lifelong
learning in education.

END

EDTC 33600:

Seminar in Educational Technology

The purpose of this course is to introduce educators to current research trends and topics in educational technology
through literature review, discussions, and case studies. The course focuses on building a knowledge base in trendy topics,
concepts, and technologies that drive educational change and innovation in P-12 education. Participants will explore
important developments of educational technology, trends of technology adoption, as well as challenges and potential
solutions of implementing advanced technologies in teaching and learning. In addition, participants will become familiar
with the major sources of educational technology research and improve their analytical and critical thinking skills.

END

EDUC 01282:

Teaching In Learning Communities II-Art

Prerequisites: C- or better in EDUC 01270

Teaching in Learning Communities II Art furthers the understanding of successful and caring learning communities begun
in Learning Communities I. A field component is required.

END

EDUC 01284:

Teaching In Learning Communities II-Music

Prerequisites: C- or better in EDUC 01270

Teaching in learning Communities II Music, is specifically designed to continue the development of an understanding of
successful and caring learning communities begun in the Teaching in Learning Communities I course and apply it
specifically to the music classroom as a "learning community." This course will be music education specific to develop a
broad and deep knowledge of music education processes throughout grades K-12 in music settings. A field component is
part of this course.

END

ENED 13501:

Applied Teaching and Learning in the Outdoors

This course critically explores theories of learning applied in outdoor environmental education (EE) settings. The course
will emphasize effective strategies for teaching and communicating about both ecosystems and environmental issues to a
diversity of learners. Students will develop and teach place-based lessons appropriate for schools or informal environmental
education settings. Other course topics will include how various types of education, including experiential, inquiry-based,
and science education contribute to teaching and learning in the outdoors. During visits to a variety of outdoor teaching
settings (both on campus and at environmental education centers, parks, etc), students will gain first-hand experience
observing and evaluating EE lessons. The main assignments for this course will include participation in advanced critical
analysis of the EE literature, including journal articles; conducting an EE teaching evaluation; developing site-specific
curriculum; and designing a long-term environmentally-based action research or service project focused on teaching and
learning in the outdoors, which will be implemented at the student’s school or other environmental education setting.
Throughout the course, students who are teachers or EE professionals will have the opportunity to apply their coursework
directly in their field of practice. The course will include one or two Saturday field trips to various outdoor EE settings.

END

ENED 13502:

Advanced Approaches to Environmental Education

In this course, we will explore the multiple dimensions of and approaches to environmental education (EE) through
analysis of current research in the field. Course topics include developing an in-depth understanding of the EE field and its
challenges, examining various theoretical perspectives from the literature that have contributed to the EE field, how these
perspectives are applied in various EE settings, and how individual and societal decision-making relate to environmental
issues. Students will visit several different settings where EE occurs (for example, pre-K to 12 classrooms, outdoor EE sites
on Rowan’s campus, including the Fossil Park, environmental education centers, parks, etc), and conduct an EE program
evaluation during one of the visits. Finally, through journal article analysis and discussion, we will critically examine
significant issues in the field of EE and discuss practical solutions to these obstacles. The course will provide opportunities
for students, including pre-K to 12 teachers and environmental education professionals, to explore curriculum that can be
implemented in their own teaching settings. Students will also conduct an environmentally-focused action research or
service project focused on investigating and/or improving a targeted aspect of environmental education at their school or
other environmental education site. The course will include one or two Saturday field trips to various EE settings.

END

HPE 00552:

CURR & ASSES IN ADAPT PHYS ACT

This course is designed to provide adapted physical activity specialists with the knowledge and basic skills required to
assess children with disabilities for their physical education needs, make a referral, work with a team to set goals, plan
individualized instruction, and advocate for children with disabilities in special education settings.

END

HPE 00553:

Community-Based Adapted Physical Activity

Prerequisites: HPE 00552 or Departmental Approval

This course is designed to provide adapted physical activity specialists with the knowledge and basic skills required to
provide appropriate and safe community-based adapted physical activity programming.

END

HPE 00554:

Pathology of Disability for the Adapted Physical Activity Specialist

Prerequisites: HPE 00552 or Departmental Approval

This course is designed to provide adapted physical activity specialists with the knowledge and basic skills required to: (1)
understand and interpret basic medical terminology; (2) list and describe characteristics of all 14 categories of disabilities
listed by IDEA and the NJ DOE; (3) list modifications for physical activity participation for individuals with disabilities
listed by IDEA/ NJ DOE plus several adult onset disabilities; and (4) discuss general causations, diagnostic procedures, and
treatments for a variety of disabilities especially in ages 3-21.

END

SECD 03330:

Clinical Experience in Teaching and Learning A Art

Prerequisites: SMED 01282; Corequisite: SECD 31350

This course introduces students to an authentic elementary art classroom in a regional school district. Field visits will
involve students in examining school and district policies, the art curriculum, field reports regarding observations of
instruction and assessment, classroom management, and teacher-student interactions. Students will collaborate on
developing one lesson plan that will be co-taught during this placement. This course consists of a class sessions and field
visits.

END

SECD 03332:

Clinical Experience in Teaching & Learning B Art

Prerequisites: SECD 03330; Corequisite: SMED 31360

This course introduces teacher candidates to a public high school art classroom setting. The course will consist of an
opening general session and field visits where teacher candidates will be introduced to school/district policies and the art
curriculum. They will observe art instruction and assessment, classroom management, and teacher-student interactions.
Teacher candidates will collaborate on designing one lesson plan that they will co-teach during this placement.

END

SMED 31350:

Elementary Art Methods: Teaching and Learning Art A

Prerequisites: C- or better in SMED 01282Corequisite: SECD 03330 and ART 09201

This course prepares pre-service teachers for instructing preschool, elementary and middle school students in the visual
arts. Through laboratory and clinical field experiences learners will apply theories of artistic learning to authentic arts
classroom situations while under faculty supervision. Assignments involve the learner in examining art curriculums, a variety
of assessment strategies used by art teachers in the classroom, and approaches for critiquing student works and aesthetic
enrichment. The learner will be required to prepare art lessons and units of study that demonstrate: a working knowledge of
artistic concepts and skills, an understanding of the artistic development of children, and considerations for adaptive
learning in the arts for special populations.

END

SMED 31360:

Secondary Art Methods: Teaching and Learning Art B

Prerequisites: SMED 31350 and SECD 03330

This course prepares pre-service teachers for instructing high school students in the visual arts. Through laboratory and
clinical field experiences learners will apply theories of artistic learning to authentic arts classroom situations while under
faculty supervision. Assignments involve the learner in examining high school art curriculums, a variety of assessment
strategies used by art teachers in the classroom, and approaches for critiquing student works and aesthetic enrichment. The
learner will be required to prepare art lessons and units of study that demonstrate: a working knowledge of artistic concepts
and skills, an understanding of the artistic development of the adolescent, and considerations for adaptive learning in the
arts for special populations.

END

SMED 31450:

Clinical Practice II: Elementary and Secondary Art

Prerequisites: SMED 31351 Corequisite(s): SMED 31451 and SECD 03350

This senior level course provides the teacher education candidate with opportunities to demonstrate the professional
knowledge, pedagogic skills and dispositions developed in preservice professional course work. The student teaching
experience is a supervised, full-time activity conducted in public elementary, middle, and secondary art classrooms. The
experience requires demonstrated mastery of artistic content, lesson planning, instructional techniques in the arts, student
assessment and classroom management. Admission to this course requires completion of professional education courses and
near completion of academic major courses. A minimum grade point average of 3.0 in major and professional education
courses is required.

END

SMED 31451:

Clinical Practice II: Seminar for Art Education

Prerequisites: SMED 31351 Corequisite(s): SMED 31450 and SECD 03350

This capstone seminar for art teacher candidates provides an opportunity to establish structural knowledge that will enable
the integration of applied art classroom experiences during the subsequent weeks of student teaching and, creates a forum
for students to process new experiences in the elementary, middle and secondary schools with art professionals who share an
understanding of the context in the art classroom. Interviewing skills and a professional portfolio will be developed during
this course.

END

SMED 32411:

Clinical Practice In Music

Corequisites: SECD 03350 and SMED 32412

This senior level course provides the teacher education candidate with opportunities to demonstrate the professional
knowledge, pedagogic skills and problem-solving ability developed in preservice, professional course work. The student
teaching experience is a supervised, full-time activity conducted off-campus in a public secondary school classroom. The
experience requires demonstrated proficiency in lesson planning and evaluation, instructional techniques, student
assessment and classroom management. Admission to student teaching requires near completion of academic major,
minimum grade point average of 3.0 in major and recommendations by major field academic department and teacher
education faculty.

END

SMED 32412:

Clinical Practice Seminar In Music

Corequisites: SECD 03350

This capstone seminar for music student teachers provides an opportunity to establish structural knowledge apriori that
will enable the integration of applied music classroom experiences during the subsequent weeks of student teaching, and
creates a forum for students to process their new experiences in the schools with music professionals who share the context
for the music classroom.

END

SMED 33510:

Computers And The Curriculum

The philosophical, psychological, sociological and educational implications of the computer and its impact on the public
school curriculum are explored. Current relationships between theory and practice, along with future technologies, are
examined.

END

SMED 33600:

Problems In Mathematics Education I

Investigates recent developments and relevant research in mathematics education. The student will determine a problem
and investigate the problem as a project. The project must deal with a problem in mathematics, mathematics education, or
computer science education. This project may be local or national in scope.

END

SMED 33601:

Problems In Mathematics Education II

Investigates recent developments and relevant research in mathematics education. The student will determine a problem
and investigate the problem as a project. The project must deal with a problem in mathematics, mathematics education, or
computer science education. This project may be local or national in scope.

END

STEM 60502:

STEM: Teaching & Research Methods II: Mathematics

Prerequisites: B- or higher in: STEM 60501 Corequisite(s): STEM 60512 and STEM 60524

This is the second course in the 3-course STEM methods sequence for candidates in the Mathematics specialization in the
Master of Arts in STEM Education program. Grounded in national and state mathematics standards, the course introduces
teaching models that support good mathematics teaching practices. Course activities and assignment are directly connected
to the corequisite resident experiences. The course will help prepare pre-service mathematics teachers to develop STEM
pedagogy in the teaching of mathematics. This course is offered annually during the fall semester.

END

STEM 60503:

STEM: Teaching & Research Methods III: Mathematics

Prerequisites B- or higher in STEM 60502, STEM 60512, STEM 60524Corequisites: STEM 60513 and STEM 60525

This is the final course in the 3-course STEM methods sequence for candidates in the Mathematics Specialization in the
Master of Arts in STEM Education program. Grounded in relevant research in mathematics and STEM education with
implications for teaching practice and national and state mathematics standards, the course continues to build on teaching
models that support good mathematics teaching practices. In addition, this course explores contemporary issues in
mathematics and STEM education. Course activities and assignments and directly connected to the corequisite residency
experiences. This course is offered annually during the Spring semester.

END

STEM 60504:

Professional Seminar for STEM Educators

Prerequisites: B- or higher in STEM 60513 and STEM 60503and STEM 60525 or STEM 60523

This is the capstone course in the MA in STEM Education and will prepare candidates for their teaching positions by
focusing on issues critical to new teachers. The course is designed to support candidates in their final transition from
teacher candidate to teacher. Topics include understanding school climate, developing a professional development plan,
developing a plan for communicating with families, planning for the first six weeks (or unit) of school, and preparing for a
substitute teacher.

END

STEM 60510:

Teaching STEM in Diverse Settings

Prerequisites: Matriculation in the MA in STEM Education

This course will enable STEM Education candidates to gain a multifaceted understanding of the individual and
institutional elements that impact student achievement in STEM. Candidates will investigate the role that gender, SES,
race, ethnicity, home language, religion, and other identity-based aspects shape school experiences, learning, and
achievement in STEM. Candidates will then learn about specific approaches and instructional practices that they can use in
the classroom to promote learning for nonmainstream students, including teaching academic language, differentiating
instruction and assessments, and supporting home, community and school partnerships.

END

STEM 60512:

STEM: Clinical Practice I

Prerequisites: B- or higher in:STEM 60501, STEM 60510 (STEM 60502 or STEM 60522)Corequisite(s): STEM 60524

This course serves as the first semester of the yearlong teacher residency required for candidates in the MA in STEM
Education. Each resident is placed in a middle or high school and attends that placement 3 full days per week during the Fall
semester. Using both Rowan and placement school district measures of teaching effectiveness, supervisors will evaluate
residents on demonstrated mastery of subject area content, lesson planning, and multiple instructional strategies to meet
varied student needs and demonstrated ability to assess learner progress and modify instruction accordingly, manage all
aspects of classroom activity, and work collaboratively with all instructional, administrative, parental, and community
members of the classroom and school community. Candidates will attend their field placement 4 full days per week during
the Fall semester.

END

STEM 60513:

STEM: Clinical Practice II

Prerequisites: B- or higher in: (STEM 60523 or STEM 60503) (STEM 60522 or STEM 60502) STEM 60512 and STEM 60524;Corequisite(s): STEM 60525

This is the second of the two field experiences required for candidates in the MA in STEM Education. Continuing in their
field placement from STEM Education Residency I, candidates will attend their field placements 4 full days per week during
the Spring semester. Using both Rowan and placement school district measures of teaching effectiveness, supervisors will
evaluate residents on requires demonstrated mastery of subject area content, lesson planning, and multiple instructional
strategies to meet varied student needs and demonstrated ability to assess learner progress and modify instruction
accordingly, manage all aspects of classroom activity, and work collaboratively with all instructional, administrative,
parental, and community members of the classroom and school community. The course will run from January through June
to enable candidates to engage in all end-of-year activities at their residency sites.

END

STEM 60522:

STEM: Teaching & Research Methods II: Science

Prerequisites: STEM 60501 and (STEM 60512 and 60524 can be taken concurrently)

This is the second course in the 3-course STEM methods sequence for candidates in the Master of Arts in STEM
Education program. Grounded in national and state science standards, the course introduces teaching models that support
good science teaching practices. Courses activities and assignments are directly connected to the corequisite residency
experiences. The course will help prepare pre-service science teachers to develop STEM pedagogy in the teaching of
science. This course is offered annually during the Fall semester.

END

STEM 60523:

STEM: Teaching & Research Methods III: Science

Prerequisites: B- or higher in STEM 60522 and STEM 60512 and STEM 60524; Corequisite: STEM 60513 and STEM 60525

This is the final course in the 3-course STEM methods sequence for science candidates in the Master of Arts in STEM
Education program. Grounded in relevant research in science teaching, this course continues to build on teaching models
that support good science teaching practices. In addition, this course explores contemporary issues in science and STEM
education. Course activities and assignments are directly connected to the corequisite residency experiences. This course is
offered annually during the Spring semester. Upon completion of the course, candidates will demonstrate the ability to: Set
long and short-term learning goals for students referenced to external benchmark; Appraise, choose, and modify tasks and
texts for a specific learning goal; Design a sequence of lessons toward a specific learning goal; Select and use particular
methods to check understanding and monitor student learning; Compose, select, interpret, and use information from
methods of summative assessment; Analyze instruction for the purpose of improving it; Communicate with other professionals

END

STEM 60524:

STEM Teaching and Research Clinical Seminar I

Prerequisites: STEM 60501 and (STEM 60522 or STEM 60502) Corequisite(s): STEM 60512

This is the first course in a two clinical seminar course sequence for all candidates in the Master of Arts in STEM
Education program. This course is specifically designed to create a professional community of mutual support for MA
STEM teacher candidates as they navigate and make sense of their clinical experience. Teacher candidates will learn about
general pedagogical and school-related issues, and develop professional supports and dispositions that will enable them to
engage with teaching as life-long learners while maintaining essential wellness and work-life balance. In addition, candidates
will learn about preparing and conducting a successful search for a secondary STEM teaching position. This course is offered
annually during the Fall semester.

END

STEM 60525:

Teaching and Research Clinical Seminar II

Prerequisites: (STEM 60502 or STEM 60522) and STEM 60523)or STEM 60503) and STEM 60512 Corequisite(s): STEM 60513

This is the second course in a two clinical seminar course sequence for all candidates in the Master of Arts in STEM
Education program. This course is specifically designed to create a professional community of mutual support for MA
STEM teacher candidates as they navigate and make sense of their clinical experience. Teacher candidates will learn about
general pedagogical and school-related issues, and develop professional supports and dispositions that will enable them to
engage with teaching as life-long learners while maintaining essential wellness and work-life balance. In addition, candidates
will learn about preparing and conducting a successful search for a secondary STEM teaching position. This course is offered
annually during the Spring semester.

END

ANTH 02202:

Introduction To Cultural Anthropology

This course presents cultural anthropology as a coherent system of data and theory designed to explain the variety of
human group behavior, giving special emphasis to the structure and function of non-western cultures.

END

ANTH 02203:

Introduction To Archeology

This course covers the rudiments of archeological field techniques, methods of analysis and dating methods.

END

ANTH 02221:

Human Variation

In this course, the genetic, immunological, anatomical and physiological variation among modern populations of humans
across the globe is examined. The course will enable students to explain human biological adaptation to the biocultural
environments in which they live, as well as to understand environmental influences on the human life cycle such as on
fertility, growth, and longevity. No prerequisites

END

ANTH 02250:

Introduction to Anthropological Linguistics

Students in this interdisciplinary course will engage in the scientific study of language with particular reference to the
relationships among the languages, thoughts, and cultures of speech communities living all over the world, including within
the United States, France, India, Canada, Spain, Japan and Peru, among others. Additional course topics include the process
of human language acquisition, structures of human language, bilingualism and the ways in which race, class, gender, and
other social characteristics may be displayed through the use of language. This course is offered every other year, beginning
in 2009.

END

ANTH 02321:

Cultural Ecology

Prerequisites: ANTH 02202 with minimum grade of C-

This course examines the relation of human groups to their environments as mediated by culture. It emphasizes the
interaction of significant variables in the natural habitat, technology, and social institutions. This course may not be offered
annually.

END

ANTH 02510:

Qualitative Research

This course introduces students to methods and theories of qualitative analysis in social science research with emphasis
upon contemporary understandings of ethics in the conduct of ethnographic research. Students will learn to use qualitative
methodologies in needs assessment, program development, and exploratory and mixed methods research projects in fields
including anthropology, criminology & criminal justice, education, economics, health science, legal studies, political science,
and sociology.

END

DI 68590:

Applied Diversity and Inclusion

Prerequisite: ANTH 02510, DI 68501 and 15 total credits

Applied Diversity and Inclusion (DI 68.590) is a three-credit course where students will have an in-depth immersive
experience and learn how to develop a professional-level independent project. Students will be actively involved in a variety
of experiential learning experiences and learn how to apply knowledge gained in prior coursework to the specific
professional contexts in which they plan to work and/or implement programs in the future.

END

DI 68591:

Capstone in Applied Diversity and Inclusion

Prerequisites: DI 58590 and 15 total credits

Capstone in Applied Diversity and Inclusion (DI 68.591) is a based on work completed in Applied Diversity and Inclusion
(DI 68.590). Students will develop their skills in applied social research including the implementation, evaluation, and
presentation of a capstone project. Students will also have the opportunity to practice leadership and partnership skills in
the classroom where presentations, peer review, and consultation will be a central process of supervision and advisement of
the capstone project curriculum.

END

DPEM 00280:

Global Catastrophes

This course examines the impact of natural and technological disasters around the globe from a cross-cultural
interdisciplinary perspective, including hurricanes, droughts, disease outbreaks, nuclear disasters, earthquakes, etc. The
course will focus on global, national, regional, and local patterns of development, examining the social, geographical, and
cultural factors that put people differentially at risk before, during, and after disasters. Using a case study approach, students
will explore how vulnerable social groups are affected by and cope with hazardous conditions and events, as well as study the
capacities of these groups that foster resilience.

END

DPEM 00300:

Bioterrorism and Weapons of Mass Destruction

This introductory course provides an overview of the different agents of biological, chemical and nuclear weapons of mass
destruction. The intelligence preparation for vulnerability analyses from nuclear, biological and chemical weapons including
low-level radiation, depleted uranium, toxic industrial chemical concerns and vulnerability reduction measures that can be
implemented for population protection are also addressed.

END

DPEM 00321:

Humanitarian Response: Evacuation and Shelter Management

Disasters, crisis and civil unrest pose chronic threats to human security. Such events stretch governments’ capacity and
diminish the effectiveness of existing systems to offer humanitarian assistance and the potential of new technologies to
transform humanitarian response. The course will highlight evacuation processes and shelter management across multiple
contexts including: immediate crisis, short-term/long-term sheltering, special needs sheltering, medical sheltering, and
refugee sheltering. This course is an in-depth analysis of the complex ethical and resource issues along with the management
skills needed to engage in humanitarian work across a variety of settings. The course will focus on “real-world” scenarios that
arise in the field.

END

DPEM 00391:

Natural and Technological Hazards: Mitigation and Response

Emergency management, at its core, encompasses the recognition and management of natural disasters, technological
disasters, and Na-Tech (hybrid) disasters. This course examines different types of natural hazards and integrates
perspectives on risk, vulnerability, resilience, and mitigation planning through an examination of natural and technological
hazards including earthquakes, tsunamis, volcanoes, floods, landslides, hurricanes, tornadoes, wildfires, climate change, and
a host of technological and human-induced hazards. Moreover, the class underscores the basic tenets of emergency
management as a set of diverse responses to various emergencies from the federal, state, and local perspectives, the
management of mass casualties, and ways to rebuild more resilient communities following a disaster.

END

DPEM 00500:

Complex Organizational Theory in Emergency Services

This course focuses on the theory of complex organizations within the field of emergency management and critical
thinking about organizations from different organizational perspectives. This course addresses organizations'
responsiveness during different stages of the disaster cycle, (mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery). Students will
analyze and diagnose problems within organizations from a variety of theoretical perspectives and derive different strategies
and recommendations for improving organizational performance in emergency management.

END

DPEM 00505:

All-Hazards Threat Response Management

This course employs an all-hazards approach to examine the complexities and commonalities of emergency responses to
the wide variety of potential hazards that can face institutions and communities. Utilizing case studies, students examine
response management to a variety of geographic, climactic, technological and terrorism-related events and learn to establish
emergency management and response protocols through planning, training, and mitigation evaluations.

END

DPEM 00522:

Emergency Preparedness, Prevention, and Community Partnerships

This course provides insight into what is needed to prepare for, respond to and recover from emergencies that impact
academic operations. The course will explore emergency preparedness, prevention and community disaster operations as it
relates to the education environment. Students will draw upon case studies based on actual events and will discuss risk
analysis/assessment and formulation of a comprehensive emergency operations plan and organizational strategy to manage
crises in cooperation with public safety and emergency services agencies during a variety of scenarios, including mass
casualty incidents.

END

DPEM 00528:

Research Methods and Statistics in Emergency Management and Homeland
Security

This course provides an overview of research and statistical approaches used to design research studies and understand data
in emergency services and homeland security. Specifically, this course helps students understand statistics, models, methods,
and practices used to conduct ethical research.

END

DPEM 00531:

Cyber Security Risk Analysis in Homeland Security

This course provides an overview of cybersecurity with respect to the analysis of risks from catastrophic destruction
resulting from cyber attacks on critical infrastructure assets. The course provides a comprehensive review of the cyber
infrastructure in the United States and will include potential social and technological solutions to guard against cyber
attacks and variety of response-related options including: social, cultural, political, policy and law enforcement. Finally, the
course will review the role of the cyber profession within the fields of law enforcement, intelligence professionals,
emergency management and homeland security.

END

DPEM 00542:

Public Health Emergency Preparedness and Response

Prerequisites: DPEM 00605

This course will introduce students to the knowledge, skills and competencies needed to address large- scale public health
preparedness and emergency response. This course explores public health aspects of surveillance, mitigation, preparedness,
response, and recovery from major categories and classification of disaster events including epidemics and weapons of mass
destruction. Other course topics include how the public health system integrates with the National Response Plan and
Framework and teaching students how to use the Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment (THIRA) to
determine community vulnerabilities.

END

DPEM 00544:

Emerging Health Threats: Risks, Surveillance, and Policy

This course offers an advanced perspective on risks, surveillance, and public policies enacted as part of an overall disaster
preparedness and emergency response to infectious diseases. In addition to presenting the latest disease surveillance
protocols, the course will examine policies and regulatory measures undertaken to protect public health as public officials
and emergency managers seek to balance community safety with individual liberties. Specific topics to be covered in the
course of this class include surveillance systems (indicator-based, event-based, and event-related), surveillance data and
trends, pandemics, vulnerable populations, Public Readiness and Emergency Preparedness (PREP) Act, quarantines,
international issues, and disease case studies.

END

DPEM 00550:

Disaster Policy and Legal Environment in Emergency Management

This course examines the complex framework of political and social policy issues related to addressing natural,
technological and terrorism disasters. Federal and state-related policies and legal considerations at the mitigation,
preparation, response, and recovery stages of the disaster cycle will be emphasized.

END

DPEM 00600:

Public Budgeting and Finance for Emergency Managers

This course focuses on government fiscal management duties as they relate to emergency management and emergency
services administration: the area generally known as public finance or fiscal administration including public economies and
policy, budgeting, revenue policy and taxation, financial management, and politics. Key to this course will be the fiscal
administration of disasters and crisis at every phase of the disaster cycle from planning to recovery. Students are exposed to
departmental budgeting, revenue structures and tax administration, financial risk management, and government and
corporate grants and grants administration.

END

DPEM 00603:

Disaster, Risk, and Vulnerability Theory

In the past few decades, human settlement patterns, land-use decisions, acts or terrorism, concentrated poverty, political
instability and social policy dynamics have increased vulnerability to hazards, disasters, and human-induced terrorism. This
course examines the variety of theories that inform our discussion of disaster, risk and vulnerability at the individual,
community, organizational, institutional, and societal levels. Understanding the root causes and interventions to mitigate
such events can help reduce disaster vulnerabilities and increase resilience at every stage of the disaster management cycle:
disaster mitigation, preparation, response, and recovery.

END

DPEM 00610:

Advanced Exercise Design and Evaluation

This course focuses on designing and implementing successful disaster exercise programs based on The National
Preparedness Goal and real-world events. The process of designing exercises is explored in depth, and methods of
conducting and evaluating exercises are discussed and analyzed. Students will participate in developing, conducting and
evaluating an emergency preparedness tabletop exercise and will gain an understanding of computer-assisted exercises.
Critical issues examined include: coordination, business recovery, damage assessment, hazard vulnerability analysis, risk
management, and agency interaction.

END

DPEM 00615:

Management of First Responder Organizations

This course is designed to enhance the students understanding of organizational leadership and management within public
sector emergency operations and incident response with specific application to public/law enforcement safety agency
management, fire safety management and emergency medical management.

END

DPEM 00619:

Violent Intruder and Mass Casualty in School Settings

This course examines violent intruder response and mass casualty situational awareness in school setting to help improve
the survivability of civilians in school setting, while increasing the preparedness levels students. By examining the principle
of modern-day violent intruder and mass casualty training programs, starting with the national-level standard of run, hide, &
fight/barcode to more advanced planning and theory for major-scale academic institutions and school proceedings to include
sports, proms, dances, family fun days, other mass gathering events. The theory portion of the course will focus on early and
current violent intruder and mass casualty events case studies. The second part of the course will plan an emergency exercise
and evaluate the outcomes of the exercise. (An additional meeting beyond the class environment will be needed to conduct
an exercise.)

END

DPEM 00622:

School-Based Threat Assessment and Planning

This course introduces students to the principles and applications of threat assessment and planning in school settings.
The course examines the importance of addressing the needs of academic institutions and the roles and responsibilities of
various agencies and personnel involved in evaluation and planning of disasters, emergencies, and violence in school settings.
This course is designed to provide students with an understanding of emergency planning and assessment to prepare for,
respond to, recover from, and mitigate future incidents. Students will learn the school safety laws, codes, and regulations
along with a range of threat assessment and risk management strategies appropriate for educational settings to evaluate their
effectiveness.

END

DPEM 00632:

Disaster Recovery Strategies and Planning for Emergency Managers

The course examines the importance of addressing the needs of the affected population as well as the roles and
responsibilities of various agencies and personnel involved in disaster recovery process. Planning for disaster recovery before
disasters occur can significantly enhance the post-disaster recovery process. This course will address the complexities of
disaster recovery plans as part of a long-term recovery planning process. Students will get the opportunity to review existing
disaster recovery plans and develop model plans. The goal of this course is to prepare students to evaluate and develop
disaster recovery plans in the context of a whole community framework to planning and comprehend post-disaster
challenges in the recovery process.

END

DPEM 00633:

Global Crisis Monitoring, Conflict Analysis & Early Warning Systems

Prerequisites: DPEM 00651

This course highlights the collection and analysis of global security information for rapid decision making in early response
components of early response monitoring systems to address catastrophe within an all-hazards approach model. Moreover,
this course will focus on threat assessment reports for possible emerging threats to peace and security and recommending
the best courses of action to address ongoing crises and post-crisis transitions. Methods of intelligence gathering will be
discussed along with the promotion of resilience among intelligence exchange networks.

END

DPEM 00634:

Rural Emergency Management

Rural communities, when compared to urban areas, tend to have fewer human resources, financial resources, capital
resources and have more logistic, distribution, and access challenges. This course will examine the characteristics of
emergency management in rural settings. Topics covered in this course will include: rural mass casualty, rural health, rural
farm and biosecurity, planning, and interagency agreements.

END

DPEM 00635:

Urban Emergency Management

This course will examine people, poverty, and disaster risk within densely populated urban areas while understanding the
characteristics of emergency management. In addition to exploring complex hazards and new opportunities to address
resilience within an urban context, this course will also employ case studies to address: social vulnerabilities, multi-agency
emergency management, resource management challenges and solutions, and intergovernmental relations.

END

DPEM 00639:

Post-Disaster Sustainable Recovery and Community Resilience

This course seeks to enhance the capacities of emergency managers and other recovery practitioners in designing,
implementing, and evaluating sustainable recovery and resilience efforts based on disaster risk reduction and sustainable
recovery and development principles. Students will learn to evaluate vulnerabilities and community-based collaborative
strategies that will assess community resilience and develop appropriate plans to enhance sustainable redevelopment after
disasters, increasing awareness of the meaningful actions to enhance community resilience through comprehensive best
practices.

END

DPEM 00645:

Advanced Incident Command: Leadership and Ethics

This course will highlight leadership theory as it relates to incident command structures. The course will follow the
National Incident Management System (NIMS) structure to include incident/event assessment, unified command
structures, incident resource management, planning process, demobilization, transfer of command, and close out from a
leadership perspective as well as ethical considerations.

END

DPEM 00646:

Fire Services Executive Leadership Clinical

Prerequisites: DPEM 00670

Students in this course will attend a field placement for 10 hours per week during the semester. In this course, students will
develop an understanding of skills associated with exercising leadership to address issues that arise in the field of fire service
settings and in the community via practical experience. Students are expected to engage in a variety of contexts to
understand effective leadership skills within the complex organizational structure of fire service.

END

DPEM 00651:

Foundations of Global Threats, Risks and Response

Prerequisite: Graduate standing or permission by instructor

This course employs a systematic approach to introduce the global threat spectrum to apply an all-hazards emergency
management response approach to risk analysis and prioritization. The major themes of this course will include:
understanding of major forms of global risks and uncertainty, tools for global conflict and risk analysis, an introduction to
early warning systems and the emergency responses to crises.

END

DPEM 00652:

Continuity of Operations

This course provides students with the theoretical, historical, and practical understanding of the development and
sustaining of continuity of operations planning and programs. In this course, a variety of settings will be used to analyze how
critical governmental, organizational, or institutional operations continue under a broad range of emergency, crisis, and
catastrophic conditions to help foster recovery and resilience in the aftermath of emergency situations.

END

DPEM 00655:

Threat Assessment in Homeland Security

This course focuses on threat assessment and risk management processes and risk strategies and policies within homeland
security. Moreover, this course addresses issues related to an understanding of key terms and incidents and the development
of practical plans for providing emergency services before, during, and after natural, technological, and terror-induced
hazards. The course provides an analysis of contemporary homeland security issues related to risk, risk mitigation, and key
social-psychological concepts. Students will gain an understanding of social class, community, and complex organizations as
they use risk assessments to address safety and security concerns.

END

DPEM 00668:

Theory and Principles in Emergency Management and Homeland Security

This course examines the theories and principles which currently exist within the emergency management and homeland
security foundational constructs. Like all social sciences, emergency management contains a number of different theories
and foundational principles such as prevention, preparedness, response, recovery, and mitigation. These key foundational
elements are ultimately the life source that fuel the theories that are put into practice in the emergency management field.
Homeland security also presents a number of principles in which the function of “homeland security” is able to thrive, grow,
and be integrated into modern society and cultures. Emergency management and homeland security are blended in a way
that leads to the theories and principles from both areas to blend and intertwine. This course will explore the in-depth
reliance and inter-connectiveness in both fields.

END

DPEM 00669:

Program Evaluation

This course offers an in-depth review of program evaluation theory, methods and practices that can assist policy makers,
organizational leaders, and stakeholders in gaining insight regarding public and private programs' ability to address critical
areas of their organization's mission, organization's vision, or grant program requirements. This course places emphasis on
theoretical and applied evaluation designs; needs assessment; data collection and analyses techniques; organizational
effectiveness; program development and review; grant proposals/funding; research reports; and continuous improvement
through feedback loops.

END

DPEM 00670:

Fire Services Administration

This course discusses the historical and theoretical background of fire service administration. The course examines the
development of the fire service from a volunteer ad-hoc response organization to the present-day multi-service public safety
organization that focuses as much on mitigation and prevention as it does response. This course is designed to provide
students with an understanding of the administrative aspect of these organizations.

END

DPEM 00671:

Advanced Fire Services Administration and Community Risk Reduction

Prerequisites: DPEM 00670

This advanced course expands upon Fire Service concepts through a variety of specialized topics that are related to
community risk reduction program management. This course is designed to provide students with an advanced
understanding of the administrative aspect of fire services and related fire science specialties administration through applied
research.

END

DPEM 00673:

Industrial Emergency Planning and Management

This course examines the complex interdependencies within industry settings to promote preparedness, mitigation,
planning, and response to hazards, crises, and disasters. Crises and disasters often occur in industrial settings and industrial
emergency planning and management addresses the needs, health, and safety concerns of various stakeholders to comply
with various federal, state, and local laws. Moreover, topics such as incident command, continuity of operations, system
redundancies, as well as local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations that govern environmental health, safety, and
emergency management will be addressed.

END

DPEM 00674:

Advanced Seminar In Hazard Mitigation

This advanced seminar course covers the theoretical and practical aspects of hazard mitigation analysis to address
long-term efforts to reduce risk and the potential impact of future disasters in the United States. The course employs case
examples from various hazards such as natural disasters (earthquakes, floods, severe winter storm), technological hazards
(nuclear incident or electrical grid failure), or hybrid disasters that have combined elements of natural or technological
disasters. In addition, students will analyze state, local, tribal, and territorial governments' emergency management
strategies for mitigating hazards, become familiar with tools and techniques for hazard mitigation planning, and discuss
types of mitigation funding.

END

DPEM 00675:

Disaster Analytics: Evidence-Based Emergency Management and Professional
Practice

This course employs data to design multi-organizational prevention, preparedness, response, recovery and mitigation
approach designs in the execution of the evolving emergency management missions set across a wide spectrum of agencies
and organizations that exist within the national professional emergency management framework. The enhancement and
development of the framework is designed and organized from evidence-based real world events and the data gained from
these events. Also, the management structures, that support and operate the framework, will be explored and explained
from the local, county, state and ultimately the national level. How these systems work, operate, relate, correlate and blend
together will be drawn from data and best practices from past events.

END

DPEM 00689:

Thesis: Emergency and Threat Response Management I

Prerequisites: DPEM 00500, DPEM 00550, and DPEM 00538

The thesis represents a sustained research endeavor on a significant thesis project under the direction of a major advisor,
which will serve as the culminating academic experience for the MS in Emergency and Threat Response Management.
Students will develop a research question and use a social scientific methodological approach to address the their research
hypothesis.

END

DPEM 00691:

Administrative Public Policy and Law for Public Managers

This course is designed to help public leaders, public managers, and members of the private sector examine administrative
agencies, problems of administrative procedure, and the methods and extent of judicial control over administrative action.
The goal of course is to be able to extract rules and policy from cases, statutes, and administrative regulations and analyzing,
interpreting and understanding rules and statutes by applying rules and policy to facts. More specifically, for the field of
public management, the course highlights how decisions and actions taken by government agencies are monitored to hold
agencies accountable.

END

DPEM 00692:

Labor Relations and Collective Bargaining

This course examines labor relations and collective bargaining via organizing, bargaining, and dispute resolution in a variety
of public and private settings. Furthermore, this course will discuss current labor law to help students gain a framework for
understanding labor relations concepts to prepare for future work in the public sector area of labor relations with specific
case examples and discussions related to New Jersey.

END

DPEM 00699:

Thesis: Emergency and Threat Response Management II

Prerequisite: DPEM 00689

The thesis represents the culmination of a scholarly endeavor on a significant issue in the field of Emergency Management
and Homeland Security under the direction of a major adviser. This course is a continuation of Thesis: Emergency and
Threat Response Management I.

END

DPEM 43355:

Emergency Exercises-Design, Implementation and Evaluation

Prerequisites: DPEM 43101

This course provides insight into the tasks, roles and responsibilities required to design and conduct an emergency
management exercise that is a part of a long-term, carefully constructed plan in which exercises help the community prepare
for disasters. Students will use a community needs assessment to develop the case for exercises, design an exercise, and
outline an evaluation plan aimed at improving competence in all emergency functions. Students will also be introduced to
the concept of a comprehensive exercise program used to improve on the four phases of emergency management. The
course instruction will follow and meet the guidelines established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency exercise
design and evaluation courses and the Department of Homeland Security Exercise and Evaluation Program.

END

DPEM 43395:

Emergency Operations and Business Continuity

Prerequisites: DPEM 00101 and DPEM 00400 or Permission of Instructor

This course provides a step-by-step approach to the development of a comprehensive emergency/disaster/crisis
management plan for organizations (e.g. manufacturing companies, corporate officers, retailers, utilities, government
agencies, or any organization where people work or gather). By analyzing how organizations prepare for, respond to, and
recover from an emergency/crisis (e.g., severe winter storm) or more localized (e.g., chemical spill, building fire), this course
emphasizes collaborative processes, applied methodologies used to plan and recover systems and processes when faced with
various types of disaster and crisis recovery scenarios that impact communities, businesses and organizations as they seek to
continue their operations. Finally, the course will emphasize how disaster preparedness directly correlates to the ability to
continue organizational operations.

END

DPEM 43420:

Risk Analysis for Disaster Preparedness and Homeland Security

Prerequisites: DPEM 43101

This course provides an analysis of vulnerability assessment as the foundation for effective hazard mitigation by
introducing and explaining various methodologies to carry out the process of vulnerability assessment. Moreover, this
course will introduce students to (1) material in the risk communication/risk perception literature; (2) basic modeling
techniques in quantitative risk assessment; (3) a risk management framework suitable for quantitative risk modeling and risk
communication, and (4) case studies related to technological hazards and natural hazards.

END

DPEM 43495:

Internship in Disaster Preparedness and Emergency Management

Prerequisites: DPEM 43101 and DPEM 43400 or Permission of Instructor

This course is designed to provide students with an experience in the profession of emergency management, homeland
security and disaster preparedness beyond that of the classroom.
NOTE: Additional placement requirements such as background checks and fingerprinting may be required.

END

HSRV 01100:

Introduction to Human Services

Prerequisites: BA in Human Services Majors

An interdisciplinary orientation to major Human Services agencies and institutions in this region, including social work,
education, corrections, substance abuse, child welfare, mental health, recreation, geriatrics, etc. Participants will study the
roles and functions of professionals in these types of Human Services careers.

END

HSRV 01320:

Applied Ethics in Human Services

Applied Ethics in Human Services provides an in-depth analysis of human services ethics, application of the National
Organization of Human Services (NOHS) Code of Ethics, and concepts and dilemmas specific to service relationships.
From a foundation in multicultural values, the course investigates the issues of responsible practice through critical analysis
and discussion. The student will apply decision making skills and critical analysis to professional situations where standards
conflict. Topics include: confidentiality, duty to warn, client rights, dual relationships, competence, multicultural issues,
sanity, malpractice and expert testimony.

END

HSRV 01400:

Senior Seminar in Human Services

Prerequisites: senior standing and completion of core requirements.

Senior Seminar constitutes the capstone experience for students
majoring in Human Services and represents the culminating exit course for students. This course is a writing intensive
experience designed to help students integrate their classroom and field experience into a coherent sense of human services
as a profession as well as a sense of the student's personal commitment to the values and ethics of the profession. As a
culminating experience, this course is based on a portfolio created from the experience the student has accrued during
his/her participation in both the academic and experiential components of the major.

END

HSRV 08310:

Research Methods for Human Services

Prerequisites: HSRV 0110, either STAT 02100 or STAT 02260 AND EITHER SOC 08120 or PSY 01107

This course introduces the student to the scientific methods used in the social sciences, the relationship between theory
and methodologies of data collection and analysis, the rudimentaries of basic types of data analysis and interpretation. Given
the applied nature of the human services degree, particular emphasis is placed on qualitative research methods and analyses.
This course is offered annually.

END

MPS 22503:

Foundations of Agile Management

This course teaches the principles and values of Agile frameworks and helps students apply Agile practices and techniques
to real-world project management. Moreover, the course is designed to demonstrate the value of project management that
fosters continuous organizational development where project management is at the center of organizational change.

END

MPS 22510:

Diversity and Labor Relations

This course has two basic areas of focus, diversity as a key component in labor relations and overall labor relations with
complex organizations. Also, this course provides an overview of the history of major labor movements, primary labor laws,
diversity and inclusion, and the general processes (establishment of union representation, collective bargaining processes
and contracts) involved in labor relations to meet the needs of a variety of work environments.

END

MPS 22511:

Organizational Decision Making and Strategic Planning

This course will integrate complex organizational theory and leadership theory with relative, practical knowledge to hone a
student’s decision making abilities in the workplace. Students will learn about tools in order to craft a large-scale,
organizational strategic plan that can be applied to their current work environment.

END

MPS 22512:

Complex Organization Dynamics: Leadership and Planning

This course is designed to provide students with a comprehensive analysis of organizational culture, leadership, and
planning skills needed in 21st century corporations. In particular, the course will address how complex organizations arise;
the logic of their operation; their often unanticipated, but systematically caused problems; environmental and technological
forces that alter and threaten them in response to globalization and other social, cultural, legal and economic
transformations. Finally, an important aspect of the course centers on the analysis and diagnosis of problems in an
organizational setting from the major theoretical perspectives and deriving different strategies and recommendations for
improving organizational performance.

END

MPS 22513:

Personnel Administration

This course will provide a general overview of the management process of an organization’s workforce, including talent
management, succession planning, diversity, and inclusion. How an organization’s personnel, or workforce, influences
organizational leadership, culture, will be discussed, along with the ethical ramifications of ensuring compliance with hiring
practices and labor laws.

END

MPS 22514:

Non-Profit Organization Development and Management

This course focuses on developing the skills for twenty-first century management and leadership in the non-profit
corporate world. Emphasis will be place on developing the skills for a collaborative approach to leadership to help non-profit
corporation managers leverage the wisdom and resources of multiple stakeholders as they come together to plan, make
decisions, and take action in organizational and community settings.

END

MPS 22551:

Foundations of Data Analytics and Reporting

Prerequisites: Matriculation into Master of Professional Studies (MPS) degree program

This course will introduce business analytical models and tools used to interpret data and their implications to
management decision making. The data analysis will enable students to make data driven decisions to optimize the business
process and address issues to enhance organizational efficiency. Moreover, the use of data in the creation of effective
business documents and oral presentations will be a key component of the course.

END

MPS 22600:

Project Management and Team Building

This course is designed to introduce project management principles and help organizational leaders strategically build
teams to achieve goals related to organizational output. The course will cover core elements of project management
including project scope, time and cost management, quality management, human resource considerations, communications,
risk management, and procurement management. Moreover, the course examines leadership styles and the analysis of group
dynamics from an interdisciplinary perspective including: psychology, sociology, organizational management, and cultural
anthropology.

END

MPS 22699:

Action Study: Master of Professional Studies Research

Prerequisites: MPS 22500 AND MPS 22503 AND MPS 22551 AND MPS 22600

This course is designed to serve as the capstone course for the Master of Professional Studies Program. The goal of course
is for students to be able to articulate, define, research and analyze a problem or challenge in their current profession or field
and integrate theory, data, and practical applications to address and develop a solution to the issue. More specifically, the
course will incorporate an “action study” in which the student will use their course experiences and knowledge to actively
address the issue during the course as part of an action-based plan that will be developed in the context of an internship
experience with support from a faculty member. The capstone course serves as the final course in the Master of Professional
Studies.

END

SOC 08120:

Introduction to Sociology

This course analyzes the characteristics of social organization and focuses on the study of social relationships and
interaction. It examines the social basis of behavior patterns, the nature of social problems and the possibilities for social
change. (Required for Sociology majors)

END

SOC 08121:

Introduction to Sociology for Premed Students

This course provides students with a general understanding of the theoretical, conceptual, and methodological approaches
to studying people in groups, institutions, societies and interpersonal interaction. It examines some of the realities of
everyday life and critically analyzes perceptions of these social phenomena. Special attention is given to understanding social
phenomena with particular relevance to health and medicine, as well as a wide range of other social arenas.

END

SOC 08221:

Social Problems

This course examines major social problems in the society as a part of the ongoing social process, with particular reference
to their economic, political and other social roots. Topics covered can include such areas as mental illness, poverty,
structured inequality, various forms of addiction, war, racism and crime.

END

SOC 08223:

Sociology of Social Welfare

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course examines the socio-historical development of social welfare, focusing upon changes in the theory and practice
of social welfare in American and other societies. This course may not be offered annually.

END

SOC 08230:

Sociology Of Minority Groups

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course analyzes the nature of the relationships among ethnic, racial and other groupings in our society. It examines
and tests sociological theories by the study of specific past and present minority group situations.

END

SOC 08323:

The Sociology of Social Work

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 AND SOC 08121 with minimum grades of C-

This course examines the socio-historical development of social work, giving attention to the processes of casework, group
work and community organization as well as aspects of social work as a profession. This course may not be offered annually.

END

SOC 08325:

Deviant Behavior and Social Control - WI

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C- AND COMP 01112

This course explores the major theoretical and research issues in the study of deviant behavior. Then, drawing on a wide
variety of types of deviant behavior, the course studies three levels of social reality: the interpersonal, the organizational and
the structural. The course seeks to place deviant behavior within the context of traditional social processes and structures.
Writing Intensive (WI)

END

SOC 08326:

Socialization of the Child Through Adolescence - WI

Prerequisites: (SOC 08120 OR SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-) AND COMP 01112

This course focuses upon the processes and social forces which facilitate the ways in which individuals are prepared to
enter various groups within the life cycle. Writing Intensive (WI)

END

SOC 08328:

Sociology of Disasters and Crisis

This course explores disasters and emergency response via a sociological lens and examines the need to systematically
understand the social impacts of such tragic events. Participants will learn how to be better prepared to function as an
effective member of their community to enhance the chances of improving preparedness, mitigation, and response to
possible natural or technological hazards. Furthermore, this course will include discussions of disaster types, individual and
collective vulnerabilities of various populations to disasters, disaster-related organization and social policies, issues of
disaster preparedness, the media and disaster response, and challenges/opportunities of disaster recovery and prevention.

END

SOC 08331:

Classical Sociological Theory

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course studies the historical and conceptual development of the major schools of thought within the "sociological
tradition." It emphasizes an understanding of the nature of theory and systems of theory, the application of theory, the
problems inherent in theorizing about society and social life and the relations between sociological theory and research.
(Required for sociology majors)

END

SOC 08332:

Contemporary Sociological Theory

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 with minimum grade of C-

Contemporary Sociological Theory covers sociological theory developed in recent times. Contemporary Sociological
Theory examines the state of the field in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, focusing on theoretical issues and
frameworks that have come to define sociology, its research and methods. It will include consideration of the Parsonian
structural functionalism of the 1950s, the critique of Positivism that emerged during the 1960s, and the fragmentation of the
field into the many current perspectives and approaches.

END

SOC 08339:

Sociological Practice

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course focuses on using sociological theories and concepts, research methods, and ethical decision-making processes
to solve problems. Sociological practice occurs at all levels from the individual to societal. The course links the student to a
variety of career pathways and occupational settings, including mental health, rehabilitation, work in prisons, and youth and
family services.

END

SOC 08353:

Sociology of Complex Organizations

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course discusses the major theories and research in complex and formal organizations, giving special attention to a
variety of organizational types, including industrial, service and non-profit. It emphasizes examining varying organization
types with respect to their size, structure, environments and their dynamics of innovation and change.

END

SOC 08375:

Sociological Research Methods

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course introduces the student to the scientific methods used in the social sciences, the relationship between
sociological theory and methodologies of data collection and analysis, the rudimentaries of basic types of data analysis and
interpretation. Students will learn to read and summarize basic scientific reports, to critically analyze and evaluate reported
research findings in the social sciences, and to recognize ethical concerns associated with sociological research. (Required
for Sociology majors)

END

SOC 08376:

Social Statistics

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course familiarizes the student with the basics in elementary statistical methods used in the social sciences and the
uses and misuses of statistics for various purposes. The student will learn to calculate and understand the proper use of basic
statistics commonly used in the social sciences. (Required for Sociology majors)

END

SOC 08399:

Sociology of the Holocaust - WI

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C- AND COMP 01112

This course primarily deals with structural and experiential dimensions of the genocidal process affecting the European
Jews, their ethnicity, culture and religious communality after 1933. Gypsies, Jehovah's Witnesses, prisoners of conscience,
Russian prisoners of war, the Polish intelligentsia, who with the Jews, became a subject of Nazi persecution are also among
those remembered. The Holocaust or shoah will provide a model for compassionate insight into the experience of other
persecuted ethnic and religious minorities or any who suffer disadvantage due to long-standing discrimination, such as
women and homosexuals. Special emphasis will be given to understanding the interpersonal processes which are part of
survival and transcendence of situations where we find society against the self. Writing Intensive (WI)

END

SOC 08401:

Human Service Organizations

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C-

This course will focus on the micro and macro aspects of human service organizations of various kinds; for example,
hospitals, courts, nursing homes, public agencies, schools, and the like. These organizations will be examined in terms of
their structure, delivery of services, their function of "processing" human beings, the internal and external environments in
which they operate, and the policy implications for delivery of services and organizational change.

END

SOC 08425:

Sociology Senior Seminar

Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C- in SOC 08120 AND SOC 08331 AND SOC 08375 AND SOC 08376

This seminar is a capstone experience designed to help students integrate what they have learned as sociology majors in a
liberal arts setting. Students will engage in oral discussions and presentations as well as written exercises and essays to
demonstrate an understanding of the sociological perspective, theoretical approaches and methods. The substantive focus
of the seminar will vary by instructor.

END

SOC 08429:

Organizational Response to Disasters and Crisis

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 with minimum grade of C-

This course will help students understand the complex social organizations and organizational responses to disasters. A
secondary goal of this course is to learn to understand and utilize the vast research published in this interdisciplinary field,
while maintaining a specific focus of the sociological core of the research. Students will gain a familiarity with local, state and
federal disaster-related organizations and how they respond within the bureaucratic structure to facilitate social recovery in
the aftermath of disasters and crisis to enhance the chances of improving disaster preparedness, disaster mitigation, and
disaster response to possible natural, human-induced or technological hazards. Furthermore, this course will include
discussions of disaster-related organization and social policies, issues of disaster preparedness, the media and disaster
response and challenges/opportunities of disaster recovery and prevention.

END

SOC 08430:

Case Management Intervention in Sociological Practice

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 AND SOC 08121 with minimum grades of C-

This course emphasizes effective case management practice at the micro, mezzo, and macro levels of system intervention
for populations at risk; Application of systems thinking to case management issues with individuals, families, and groups;
Issues of aging, family mental health, child welfare, adult services and health are interwoven into practice scenarios in an
effort to explore the multiple social problems faced by groups in a social service organization on a regular basis.

END

SOC 08494:

Field Experience Seminar in Sociology - WI

Prerequisites: SOC 08120 or SOC 08121 with minimum grade of C- AND COMP 01112

This seminar provides the opportunity for students to be engaged in a field experience which will contribute to their
sociological development. Students interact with their instructor and the other students in the seminar in the development,
supervision and completion of individual projects. Areas of interest may include sociological research, analysis of social
agencies and the development of affirmative social action programs.
Writing Intensive - WI

END

SOC 08550:

Colloquium in Social Justice

This course introduces students to in-depth analysis of a selected theme in social justice, including sociological theories,
models, and method used for that topic as well as intensive research, data analysis, problem solving, and class discussion on
the topic. Selected topics may include race/ethnicity, immigration/nativity, disability, class, religion, gender and sexuality.

END

SOC 08551:

Colloquium in Urban Sociology

This course introduces students to in-depth analysis of a selected theme in urban sociology, including sociological theories,
models, and method as well as intensive research, data analysis, problem solving, and class discussion. Selected topics include
(but are not limited to) urban demographics, urban growth and contraction, gentrification, urban environments, urban
health, global cities.

END

SOC 08552:

Colloquium in Medical Social Science

This course introduces students to an in-depth analysis of a selected theme in medical social science, including sociological
and anthropological theories, models, and methods, as well as intensive research, data analysis, problem solving, and class
discussion. Selected topics include (but are not limited to) death, dying and bereavement; spirituality and health; ecologies of
health; epidemiology; ethnomedicine; social movements in health.

END

SOC 08570:

Integrating Qualitative and Quantitative Methods

This course is designed for students who are interested in careers that involve social research. It trains students to
integrate qualitative and quantitative methods to produce knowledge that cannot be produced through a single-method
study. Students will pose a research question of social and scientific importance, design an appropriate integrated methods
study to produce answers, and conduct original research. Students will link their methodological procedures with their
research purpose, explain how the integration of qualitative and quantitative methods can advance knowledge production,
and practice ethical research.

END

SOC 08575:

Social Determinants of Health: Theory and Intervention in Urban Settings

This course expands categories of disease risk beyond disease pathology and individual factors to psychological and
sociological phenomena within an urban context. Moreover, this course seeks to describe the relationship between these
conditions and health or health outcomes focused on factors such as water and air quality and food safety. More recent
public health efforts have identified a broader array of conditions affecting health, including community design, housing,
employment, access to health care, access to healthy foods, environmental pollutants, and occupational safety. The link
between social determinants of health, including social, economic, and environmental conditions, and health outcomes is
widely recognized in the public health literature to address persistent and pervasive health disparities.

END

SOC 08578:

Critical Race Theory: Application and Intervention

Students will explore the social construction of race and the subsequent implications this phenomenon has for particular
members of society. Building upon the origins of the Critical Legal Studies Movement and Critical Raced Theory (CRT),
students will examine their own dispositions for significant issues from the centrality of race, class and gender to better
understand the need for becoming social justice advocates while learning a variety of social justice intervention strategies.
Specific attention will be focused on the medical/clinical setting where issues of race, class and gender can pose barriers to
culturally competent care for clients.

END

SOC 08580:

Survey Design and Analysis

This course will provide students with the tools needed to engage in quantitative survey design and analysis for a variety of
needs and settings, including needs assessment for community, government, non-profit or business organizations. Students
will learn to analyze survey data both from primary and secondary sources, using statistical procedures, and to write up
conclusions and reports intelligible to a broad range of audiences. Presentations will provide practice in oral, written and
graphic dissemination of results.

END

SOC 08590:

Social Change

This graduate course covers prevailing theories of social change, examples of current changes occurring in society, how
sociological perspectives contribute to social policy and collective action to implement these changes.

END

SOC 08591:

Social Dynamics of Political Violence, Insurgency and Civil Unrest

Non-state political violence has become one of the major public policy issues in both US foreign policy and increasingly as
well in domestic policy by examining policy decisions made in response to both terrorist attacks and the threat of terrorism
in homeland security planning, border security, and surveillance. The course emphasizes international non-state violence,
such as terrorism, militancy, insurgency, guerilla warfare, low-intensity conflict and civil war, and how communities, states
and regions respond. By examining numerous international case examples of responses to terrorism through emergency
response organizations, community organizations, and volunteerism, students will have a better understanding of the
significance of social factors that serve as catalyst for the root causes of terrorism and factors that strengthen community
resilience following terrorism and civil unrest.

END

SOC 08599:

Urban Environmental Health

This course examines a broad range of factors affecting public health in urban environments within the context of essential
formal public health infrastructures and informal settlements. An in-depth analysis of how increased exposures of industrial
toxins, sanitation, air and water quality, poverty, geographic dispersion and how social environments place stress on city
inhabitants collectively affect a city’s health, as well as how these cities can respond to meet the increased challenges will be
explored.

END

SOC 08600:

Social Experience of City Life and Urban Inequalities

This course will utilize a social psychological perspective, symbolic interaction, to understand urban dynamics. The course
will focus on the study of the historical transformation of the city and the creation of social and psychological order in cities,
an in-depth study of how the physical and social settings of cities influence health and behavior and how reciprocally urban
behavior influences the physical and social settings. A considerable amount of time will analyze urban public behavior and its
social psychological consequences in terms of how people conduct their daily routines with strangers, friends, relatives, and
neighbors. Everyday interaction patterns of urbanities – pedestrian, transportation, shopping patterns, sports, parks,
playgrounds, museums, theaters, etc. – will be analyzed. Moreover, attention will be turned to the study of urban
communities and lifestyles of different social classes concerning urban inequality and social differences. The social and
psychological consequence of living in the city is a major theme of concern for this course.

END

SOC 08642:

Global Environmental Justice and Social Change

The central issue of this course is global environmental inequity and social justice. The course critically examines literature
and data on global environmental justice, its historical context, and changing political, social, economic, cultural approaches
to environmental policies in an international context. Students in this course will analyze and critically evaluate real-world
environmental justice cases and the responses to those cases and propose socially just mechanisms to address the
disproportionate effects of environmental degradation.

END

SOC 08690:

Urban Research Studio

From community-based research and data collection to conduct original research to policy analysis, program evaluation, or
projects that introduce new novel approached to addressing urban health issues, this is a project-based course that can take a
variety of formats. Ideally, with the consultation of an advisor, each participant in this course will undertake a research
project. The results of this research may be an academic paper, a health policy position paper, a community education
documentary or the submission of a grant application to seek funding for future programmatic needs or future research.

END

SWK 01510:

Research Methods in Social Work

Prerequisites: STAT 02260

This course examines social work research methodology and the scientific, analytical approach to gaining knowledge.
Students are introduced to the entire research process: posing a research question; conducting a literature review; generating
a hypothesis; identifying the different kinds of variables, ethical and political issues, gender and ethnic issues, measurement
issues, questionnaire construction, sampling, data collection, coding, data analysis, and communication of results. MSW
graduate students develop a literature review and design their own research proposal. This course is open only to social work
majors.

END

SWK 01515:

Disparity, Systemic Inequality and Social Work Ethics

Corequisites: SWK 01525

This course will explore the professions’ early roots in social and economic justice and the forces of systemic oppression
that maintain inequality. Students will develop skills to recognize and assess power, privilege and the intersection of cultural
values, systems and structures. Students will also explore equitable and inclusive communities, institutions, policies and
interventions consistent with the core foundational commitment to human rights and social work ethical mandates.

END

SWK 01525:

Introduction to Generalist Social Work Practice

This course introduces social work roles and the range of practice environments. Central tenants of professional practice
recognized by accreditation and licensing bodies and professional ethics are presented as part of a unifying professional
mission grounded in advocacy, human rights and social justice for marginalized and oppressed people and communities.
Generalist social work skills are explored and practiced across a variety of populations and settings.

END

SWK 01530:

Social Policy, Advocacy and Practice

Prerequisites: SWK 01525

This course introduces macro practice; identifying problems at the community and organizational level; organizing and
building relationships within communities and organizations; and organization-based/ community-based policy making,
planning, and program development. Students will build generalist social work practice skills preparing for work in groups,
agencies and organizations.

END

SWK 01540:

Mental Health Assessment Across the Lifespan

Corequisites: SWK 01525

This course explores mental health and well being across developmental stages throughout the life cycle. Intra societal
differences in illness and the ecological distribution of mental health disorders are introduced in the context of biological,
sociological, cultural, psychological and spiritual theories of development consistent with social works'
person-in-environment framework. Prevalent categories of psychiatric disorders are considered with respect to their
relevance for social work practice and students are introduced to diagnosis, diagnostic tools, assessment and biopsychosocialinterviews.

END

SWK 01550:

Generalist Field Work and Seminar in Social Work I

Corequisites: SWK 01525

This is the introduction to field experience and companion seminar for the MSW generalist foundational year. Students
will practice social work in agency settings under qualified professional supervision and apply theory with advanced
professional practice in field and seminar discussions.

END

SWK 01551:

Generalist Field Experience and Seminar II

Prerequisites: SWK 01559

This is the second semester of field work and companion seminar in the MSW generalist foundational first year of the
MSW. Students will practice social work in agency settings under qualified professional supervision and apply theory with
practice in field work and seminar discussions.

END

SWK 01610:

Advanced Social Work Research, Evaluation, Planning and Administration

Prerequisites: SWK 01510

This course examines the integration of research in program administration and evaluation. The application of research for
strategic planning and program development for human service organizations is explored within cultural context/s. This
course builds on the introductory research course and applies data access and analysis skills as the basis of program
evaluation.

END

SWK 01620:

Social Work Supervision and Leadership

Prerequisites: SWK 01540 and SWK 01525

This course explores administrative and clinical social work supervision. Theoretical and conceptual models of supervision
provide a framework for social work roles in performance evaluation and professional development in agency leadership.
The unique role of clinical supervision in social work is also explored with particular emphasis on cultural competence and
use of self.

END

SWK 01630:

Mental Health and Healthcare Policy

Prerequisites: SWK 01530

This course explores how health and mental health policy shape social work interventions and service delivery. Analysis of
health and mental health policy issues such as access, financing and reform are explored in the context of the social
construction of illness, health care determinants and the integration of health and behavioral health. Race, ethnicity, gender,
disability, and socio economics are considered as part of a health equity approach to health and well-being.

END

SWK 01640:

Impact and Intersections of Mental Health, Substance Abuse, and Trauma

Prerequisites: SWK 01540 and SWK 01545

This course examines the physiological, neurobiological, psychological, and social impact of traumatic stress on the mind,
body, and social environment and the integration of this framework in addictions and mental health treatment. There will
be a focus on strengths-based practice and the identification of protective factors that foster resiliency . This course also
addresses use of trauma informed practices to effectively support individuals and families across the lifespan.

END

SWK 01650:

Advanced Field Work and Seminar in Social Work I

Prerequisites: SWK 01551

This is the beginning field experience and companion seminar for the MSW specialization year. Students will practice
social work in agency settings under qualified professional supervision and apply theory with advanced professional practice
in field and seminar discussions.

END

SWK 01651:

Advanced Field Work and Seminar in Social Work II

Prerequisites: SWK 01650

This is the final field experience and companion seminar for the MSW specialization year. Students will practice social
work in agency settings under qualified professional supervision and apply theory with advanced professional practice in
field and seminar discussions.

END

SWK 01660:

Emerging Approaches to Integrative Health and Well Being

Prerequisites: SWK 01545 and SWK 01530

This course explores the unique role of social work in new and emerging approaches to integrative health and well being.
Students will gain exposure to a range of practice orientations and consider their application and integration across a range
of social work settings/ practice areas. Central tenants of professional social work are explored and evaluated in the context
of these developing models.

END

SWK 01670:

Transdisciplinary Social Work Practice and Integrated Care

Prerequisites: SWK 01545 and SWK 01620

This course is part of the second year MSW specialization course sequence and explores the role of social work in the
development of transdisciplinary practice. The integration of behavioral health and physical health will be explored through
clinical and organizational perspectives. Central tenants of professional social work practice and ethics are also explored and
evaluated in the context of developing models and settings.

END

THD 07501:

Introduction To Graduate Theatre Study

This course examines basic tools for graduate research in theatre. Students learn to analyze, support and present written
research at the level expected of a graduate student. Their writing style will be evaluated and writing exercises will be
critiqued. In addition, students will review scholarly documentation and look at various approaches the writer can take to
assemble a thesis proposal.

END

THD 07502:

Studies In World Theatre History And Criticism

Through the study of landmark works of drama and dramatic theory, this course investigates style, form and production
methodology in selected periods of European and Asian theatre from the Classical Age to 1915. A research paper is required.

END

THD 07503:

Studies In American Theatre History And Criticism

Building on student background and interest, this course will focus on the history of theatre in America from the colonial
period through America's emergence as a world theatre force (the work of O'Neill and others) to the post-modern
experiments of today. Students will investigate the work of major playwrights, critics, theatre practitioners and theorists
across a broad cultural and social spectrum.

END

THD 07505:

Independent Study In Graduate Theatre And Arts Administration

Prerequisites: Permission of the departmentGraduate Committee

Students will pursue research in an area of theatre study determined by the student in consultation with the adviser. The
project can include examination of performance activities, historical or critical concerns or any other area of concern to the
student.

END

THD 07507:

Challenges In Design & Technical Production

The activity in this course will examine specific set, costume and lighting design and technical production challenges
presented by the stylistic and physical demands of a script. The student will be required to research and create practical
solutions within an overall design concept.

END

THD 07508:

Seminar In Directing: Working With The Actor

This course explores techniques employed by the director working with actors during the rehearsal period. Topics include:
conducting efficient rehearsals, improving physical and vocal effectiveness, guiding characterizations, stimulating emotional
credibility and creating ensemble. Examination of source works on acting and directing is augmented by observation and
demonstration.

END

THD 07509:

Special Problems In Directing

Utilizing research, discussion and a laboratory format, the student will explore advanced concerns of staging and style. This
course will focus on topics selected from the following: specialized blocking situations; regionalisms, dialect and verse
dialogue; historical production styles; non-realistic production styles; post-modern approaches to acting and directing; the
role of gender in directing; the semiotics of directing. The course culminates in a final scene project.

END

THD 07511:

Production/Performance/Arts Administration Project

Prerequisites: Permission of the departmentGraduate Committee

This course enables students to use production or arts administrative work as a centerpiece for a reflective and faculty
supervised research project. Students may write, design, direct, choreograph, perform or conduct practical field research in
arts administration either on the Rowan campus or at a faculty approved professional arts venue. Combined with further
research and writing, the project provides the student with an in-depth look at production activity in a wider context. The
prospective project must be approved by and supervised by department faculty. This project may also serve as the capstone
experience for the M.A.in Theatre: Arts Administration or the Graduate Certificate in Theatre.

END

THD 07515:

Internship In The Arts

Prerequisites: Permission of the departmentGraduate Committee

This course offers credit for faculty supervised, practical experience with a theatre or arts-related company, in acting,
directing, design/production, management or dramaturgy. In general, 3 semester hours are given for a full semester or
summer in such a setting and students must complete a comprehensive, reflective report and/or journal of their activities.
The course may be repeated to a maximum of 6 S.H.. The prospective internship and duties must be approved by and
supervised by department faculty in advance.

END

THD 07520:

Thesis Research And Writing

Completion of 17 s.h. in the theatre program and approval of advisor is required. This credit is earned for time spent
researching and writing the master's thesis under the supervision of a faculty adviser. The student reports to the adviser on a
regular basis during this period. The finished thesis must be approved by a committee composed of the adviser and two
other faculty designated by the department. The 6 s.h. of credit may be taken all at one time or be divided between two
terms (3 s.h. each).

END

THD 07525:

Theory And Practice In Teaching Theatre K-12

This course presents teaching/learning theory and its application in K-12 theatre education. Students will learn to design
and teach theatre arts experiences, observe and evaluate teaching, and develop resources, including instructional plans for a
multi-week unit, for teaching at the elementary and secondary level. Through this course, students will actively learn the
knowledge and skills needed to teach an effective K-12 theatre curriculum.

END

THD 07530:

ARTS ADMINISTRATION LEADERSHIP

This course provides an overview of the administrative functions of non-profit arts organizations and explores the theories
and practices behind decision-making in arts organizations today. The course will focus on analyzing concepts for managing
arts organizations, including organizational plans, managing boards, fund-raising, human resources, facilities, program
development, and effective evaluation.

END

THD 07531:

Producing And The Arts

This course examines the relationship between the artistic quality and the financial reality of an arts organization. Through
lecture, discussion, and projects, students learn about basic accounting, short- and long-term budgeting and planning, and
financial managment in relation to arts organizations.

END

THD 07532:

Arts Planning: An Elegant Process

The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the artistic process as it relates to planning. By applying the artistic
process to planning as the unifying principle, students will understand how artistic behaviors inform organizations to
achieve health and dynamic balance. Through lectures, written assignments and discussion students will be led through a
planning process and examine professional leadership, vision, core beliefs and values, internal and external relationships,
organizational format and equation, planning, assessment and adaptive processes.

END

THD 07533:

Audience Development

The purpose of this course is to provide an overview of basic arts and audience development, behavior and research.
Coursework assists students in forming a comprehensive understanding of audience development, while providing
frameworks for the practical application of audience development in non-profit arts organizations.

END

THD 07534:

Education & Outreach Programs In The Arts

Education programs allow arts institutions to interact with their communities in a deeply connected manner, build future
audiences and provide both children and adults with a deeper appreciation for the place of the arts in their lives. This course
studies the development and implementation of such programs within arts institutions ranging across the span of all the
artistic disciplines.

END

THD 07535:

Curatorial Practice In The Arts

This course focuses on the dynamic field of curatorial practice in contemporary art and performance. Through the study of
the changing perception of the role of the curator as one who has traditionally "cared for" objects of art, to one who
innovates, mediates, critiques and produces, students will gain knowledge of how exhibitions bring works of art and
performance to the public. In addition students will research the role of technology and other evolving forms of curatorial
practice.

END

THD 07536:

Fundraising & Development for the Arts

This course focuses on how fundraising and development supports arts organizations and aids in setting and achieving
institutional goals and missions. Students will prepare an annual fundraising plan, a long form grant proposal, learn to
determine program fundability and identify arts funding opportunities across four funding categories: individuals,
foundations, corporations, and government agencies. Assignments also include setting realistic goals and objectives for
different arts fundraising/development activities, evaluating success and sustainability to secure future funding and using
new media, print, broadcast and digital media to build support for their chosen arts organization.

END

THD 07537:

Advocacy and Arts Policy

What is public policy? How do we define ‘Arts” as a policy sector? What are the points of view of individuals, communities
and organizations and how do they impact the development of government policies for the arts? Students will examine
research to develop a broader framework related to the relevance and importance of the arts in our society. Students will
develop an understanding of the relationship between public policy and the arts in the United States. This course is designed
for students with the knowledge and skills to craft an effective argument about arts policy, to make a policy
recommendation based on research and analysis and to present that argument.

END

THD 07542:

Theatre of the Holocaust

This class provides students with the historic and dramatic background needed to comprehend and explore difficult issues
surrounding the World War II Holocaust through the lens of dramatic literature. Students will gain an understanding of
how playwrights and other artists use performance and theatre to explore a catastrophic "unthinkable" historic event.

END

AFRI 16540:

Special Topics In Foreign Languages And Literatures

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established Foreign Languages and Literatures curriculum. Eash
semester the instruction of this course rotates among faculty memebers who select topics according to their current
scholarly interests. In this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

ARAB 12540:

Special Topics In Foreign Languages And Literatures

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established Foreign Languages and Literatures curriculum. Eash
semester the instruction of this course rotates among faculty memebers who select topics according to their current
scholarly interests. In this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

CHIN 07540:

Special Topics In Foreign Languages And Literatures

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established Foreign Languages and Literatures curriculum. Eash
semester the instruction of this course rotates among faculty memebers who select topics according to their current
scholarly interests. In this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

FREN 02540:

Special Topics In Foreign Languages And Literatures

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established Foreign Languages and Literatures curriculum. Eash
semester the instruction of this course rotates among faculty memebers who select topics according to their current
scholarly interests. In this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

GERM 03540:

Special Topics In Foreign Languages And Literatures

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established Foreign Languages and Literatures curriculum. Eash
semester the instruction of this course rotates among faculty memebers who select topics according to their current
scholarly interests. In this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

ITAL 04540:

Special Topics In Foreign Languages And Literatures

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established Foreign Languages and Literatures curriculum. Eash
semester the instruction of this course rotates among faculty memebers who select topics according to their current
scholarly interests. In this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

LAT 09540:

Special Topics In Foreign Languages And Literatures

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established Foreign Languages and Literatures curriculum. Eash
semester the instruction of this course rotates among faculty memebers who select topics according to their current
scholarly interests. In this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

RUSS 06540:

Special Topics In Foreign Languages And Literatures

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established Foreign Languages and Literatures curriculum. Eash
semester the instruction of this course rotates among faculty memebers who select topics according to their current
scholarly interests. In this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

SPAN 05540:

Special Topics in World Languages

This course brings new perspectives and themes to the established Foreign Languages and Literatures curriculum. Eash
semester the instruction of this course rotates among faculty memebers who select topics according to their current
scholarly interests. In this way, the course expands options for upper-level electives.

END

MAWR 01546:

CONTEMPORARY RHETORIC

This course introduces students to rhetorical theory, classical through modern. Against a backdrop of Sophistic, Greek,
and Roman rhetorics and their contemporary applications, students will consider major contemporary rhetorical theories by
I.A. Richards, Kenneth Burke, James Kinneavy, and others. In addition to responses to these theoretical works, students
will produce a rhetorical analysis of a text or texts from their own area of interest, investigating how the application of
rhetorical strategies produces particular outcomes with particular audiences.

END

MAWR 01549:

Issues In Composition Studies

Issues in Composition Studies examines the dominant theories, texts and ways of knowing that are fundamental to the
discipline of composition/rhetoric. Topics include current and historical perspectives on the composing process, the
formation and functions of discourse communities, writing as a social process and methods of assessment. The course will
demonstrate various avenues for research and teaching in composition and rhetorical studies, will provide students with
knowledge necessary to construct a theoretical model for the everyday teaching of writing and will assist students in
applying and refining that model.

END

MAWR 01554:

Core I: Theories and Techniques of Writing

Core I offers an indepth examination of theories of composing, focusing on the interdisciplinary nature of writing through
inquiry into rhetorical elements common to all writers, for example, genre, tone, audience, point of view, and voice. It also
considers basic principles and techniques of writing, including narration, dialogue, exposition and style. Students will
examine many genres of writing and compare and contrast the application of techniques to the differing genres.

END

MAWR 01555:

Writing for Electronic Communities

This course presents the rhetorical, social, and practical dimensions of writing in electronic (cyber) contexts. Students
focus both on the various roles an individual creates and maintains when writing for different cybermedia formats and the
kinds of conventions, concerns and grammars that exist in discrete electronic systems like the World Wide Web, listservs,
distribution lists, the Intranet, e-mail, and hypertext. Seminar presentations and a semester-long project in a concentrated
area of writing for a particular electronic community demonstrate students' ability to communicate on-line.

END

MAWR 01556:

Assessment of Writing

Assessment of Writing examines the dominant methods, issues and concerns that are central to the discussion and
evaluation of students' written work. Topics include current and historical perspectives on writing assessment, the use of
various models of writing assessment, the political and legal issues connected to writing assessment, and the validity and
reliability of assessment models. The course will introduce students to the types of assessment models used in the field of
composition, will explore the effectiveness of comments on papers, and will examine how to assess errors in writing. This
class will also provide students with knowledge necessary to apply a range of assessment models in the application of writing
across multiple workplace situations, and will assist students in applying and refining those models to new developments in
computer-assisted writing.

END

MAWR 01557:

Writing Freelance Features

Students in this graduate level writing course will learn how to develop ideas for feature-length stories (such as profiles,
trend pieces and human interest pieces) and how to research and write features on a variety of topics. They will learn how to
structure feature stories, including longer (8,000-plus words) stories; how to write feature leads and "nut grafs;" and how to
edit their own work to prepare it for submission. Finally, they will learn how to develop and present stories and story ideas to
editors at both print and digital publications and how to submit their completed work for publication.

END

MAWR 01558:

Fiction Workshop

Students will complete, through the composition of a first draft and revision, works of literary fiction with emphasis upon
the short story. In addition, students will read a body of published stories that illustrates such elements of fiction as setting,
point of view, characterization and dialogue. Students will develop an analytical vocabulary that enables them to read,
interpret, and evaluate the work of other fiction writers. A major portion of this class will be given over to workshop sessions
during which students share and evaluate each other's work. As a workshop, this course can be taken twice for credit.

END

MAWR 01559:

Core II: Research Methods for Writers

Prerequisites: MAWR 01554

Core II surveys non-quantitative research methods writers use. This class examines techniques of print and on-line
research, interviewing, and case studies to develop the ability to weigh and assess the reliability and relevance of
information. Students will learn to identify and present problems in writing using different perspectives and learn how these
research styles guide a writer's interpretation of information. The course prepares students to develop their own descriptive
research projects.

END

MAWR 01560:

Managerial Communication

Managerial Communication introduces students to the theoretical and practical insights of corporate communication. The
course helps students develop leadership communication skills and is designed to improve communication skills for
managers, information workers, and other professional writers. Students will learn about rhetorical theories and rhetorical
strategies for responding to communication situations, current forms of corporate communication, effects of technology
and globalization on corporate communication, and guidelines for ethical communication. Students will prepare a variety of
professional quality documents in response to real world, case-based assignments.

END

MAWR 01561:

Seminar I

Prerequisites: MAWR 01554 and MAWR 01559

In Seminar I students will demonstrate what they have learned in the MA in Writing program by proposing and
completing the initial stages of a major project in a genre of their choosing. This project, which will be completed in Seminar
II, may have a creative emphasis (fiction, poetry, creative nonfiction) or a scholarly or research-based emphasis. Working
with peers, under the mentorship of two faculty readers, students will develop their skills in writing, project management,
and the personal and professional strategies necessary to sustain a writerly life.

END

MAWR 01564:

Information Architecture

Information Architecture explores the connections among web site usability, interactivity, design, and navigation
principles as each relate to the written content. Students investigate how written content influences the look and
user-friendliness of web sites. Specific issues addressed in the course include presenting content for audiences with
disabilities or for non-English speakers; privacy and security concerns; and the rise of information anxiety in the general
public.

END

MAWR 01565:

Technical Writing

Technical Writing introduces students to the rhetorical, ethical, and professional issues associated with technical
communication. It focuses on the rhetorical principles behind standard formats and styles of technical documents. It
explores topics such as, document design; ethics (including issues of product liability); editing, style, and mechanical
correctness; the role of technology; and the impact of the global marketplace.

END

MAWR 01566:

Editing the Literary Journal

This course provides hands-on experience with the editorial and managerial processes involved in publishing Glassworks, a
literary journal in print and electronic formats. Students will study both successful and struggling journals and basic
reference guides to determine criteria for success. Working with the instructor and various section editors, students will
solicit, evaluate, and select submissions, communicate with contributors about editorial decisions, determine the layout and
design of the journal, and distribute the journal. They will also evaluate and produce editorial content in various genres,
including book reviews, author interviews, and opinion editorials, for potential publication in the magazine.

END

MAWR 01567:

Professions in Publishing

In this Master’s level course, students will be introduced to the vast and complicated world of publishing, and will acquire a
basic understanding of the different roles, terms, and current issues within the industry, especially as it pertains to trade
industry publishing. Students will explore the variety of publishing structures in the industry today, emphasizing
developmental editing and the role of the acquisitions editor. Students will also learn about marketing, production, sales,
agenting, contract negotiation, and the process of developmentally editing manuscripts. Through working hands-on with
materials and speaking with industry professionals, students will leave the course empowered to engage in the publishing
industry and what such work will entail.

END

MAWR 01570:

Experimenting with the Major Work-in-Progress

Prerequisites: MAWR 01559 or Permission of the Instructor

When writers come up with an idea for a book or a major creative project, they often need to go through a period of
incubation, testing, experimentation, and play. What style or voice will give energy to the story? What structure should it
have? How will the narration be paced? What events will frame the book? The purpose and method of this class will be to
encourage experimentation as students work to answer these questions. Student may advance their ideas for the MA in
Writing project for Seminar I and II or create a new project. Students will explore theories of creativity, bricolage, process,
genre, leitmotif, pattern recognition, and narrative design, using the familiar elements of craft (setting, character, narration,
etc.) with emphasis upon advanced strategies represented by model texts.

END

MAWR 01571:

Seminar II

Prerequisites: MAWR 01561

In Seminar II students will complete the Master’s Project they began in Seminar I. In this process, they will continue to
work with faculty readers and their peers to refine their writing, apply the advice given, and develop strategies for
self-editing. As they continue to apply strategies of project management and the personal and professional strategies
necessary to sustain a writerly life, students will reflect on their work through regular presentations, which will culminate in
the public presentation of their work in the yearly MA in Writing Symposium.

END

MAWR 01575:

Practicum in Teaching Composition

The Practicum in Teaching Composition supports first-time graduate instructors in the Teaching Experience Program by
introducing foundational concepts in Writing Studies and select theories in Composition/Rhetoric, and by exploring and
modeling best pedagogical practices. The Practicum in Teaching Composition (MAWR 01575) develops a community of
instructors through seminar-style discussions, collaborative projects, and reciprocal classroom observations. Assignments
directly relate to students’ professionalization as instructors and members of the field of Writing Studies. Students develop
reflective teaching practices that prepare them to teach subsequent composition courses.

END

MAWR 01615:

Independent Study

END

MAWR 01618:

Special Topics

This course has a changing focus that permits faculty to offer specialized seminars focusing on current trends in the field,
areas of faculty creative work and scholarship, or student requests. Students may take this course for credit more than once,
provided the subtitle is different. This course may not be offered annually.

END

MAWR 01620:

Internet and Writing Studies

This is a theory driven seminar course with a practical component wherein students will learn HTML, CSS, and how to
compose web sites according to the latest theories on web design. Students will read scholarly texts that introduce them to
the evolution of written communication and writing technologies, Internet studies, and hypertext theory. Students will use
these texts and theories to both analyze and compose various web sites, including an online portfolio of work they would
like to showcase for future employers or graduate schools.

END

MAWR 01621:

Visual Rhetoric and Multimodal Composition

This is a theory driven seminar course with a pracitcal component. Students will read scholarly texts that introduce them
to theories on multimodality, semiotics, visual rhetoric, copyright, and remix. Students will use these theories to both
analyze and compose visual texts using multiple modes of communication.

END

MAWR 01622:

Publishing for Creative Writers

In this course, students aspiring to become published authors will explore many facets of literary publishing, from
submitting work to agents and editors to editing a manuscript in production and marketing a completed book. Students will
examine the many complex processes by which a literary manuscript (novel, story collection, memoir, etc.) becomes a book.
Students will learn how to submit creative work to literary magazines, to agents, and to publishers. They will submit at least
one completed work (an essay, a story, or a poem) to an appropriate journal or magazine. They will write a query letter and a
synopsis for one of their own book-length projects and develop a marketing plan for the projected work. They will learn the
most common reasons that writing is rejected and how to avoid them. They will learn about the varied roles of agents and
editors from the editorial process through the design, production and promotion of the book. They will learn about the
importance of applying for grants and fellowships, of submitting to literary competitions, and of "networking" in the
development of a writing career. Students with completed or nearly completed books may use their own manuscripts for all
of the above assignments.

END

MAWR 01623:

Writing Stories for Children And Young Adults

Students in this course will study the rich variety of fiction and nonfiction narrative published for audiences ranging in age
from juvenile to young adult. Students will learn to recognize the elements of a good story for children, to evaluate children's
literature based on a knowledge of these elements, and to write stories for this audience. Students will read outstanding
examples in the genre and write their own stories, working methodically from story idea through revision to completed
manuscript. (Students may choose to write fiction or nonfiction and may focus on short or long form narrative.) Students
will critique each other's stories in workshop sessions. Students will also study the contemporary scene in children's
publishing and will learn how to submit their stories to magazine and book publishers. As a workshop, this course can be
taken twice for credit.

END

MAWR 01630:

Writing Difference

This course contrasts writing in academic genres against a variety of other forms, such as personal, imaginative, and popular
writing. Students examine perspectives on language difference from sociolinguistic, literacy, feminist and composition
studies perspectives, and produce writing in hybrid, multigenre or mixed-genre styles.

END

MAWR 02505:

Poetry Workshop

This class will provide a forum for students to explore the strategies poets use in creative expression. The students will
develop an analytical vocabulary that allows them to read, interpret, and evaluate the work of other poets. A major portion
of the class will be given over to workshop sessions, where students can share and evaluate each other's work. Students will
also become familiar with a body of published poetry that illustrates techniques of expression, especially those that can be
applied, not only to poetry, but to other genres of creative writing. As a workshop, this course can be taken twice for credit.

END

MAWR 02515:

Creative Nonfiction Workshop

Teaching students the form, structure and techniques of creative nonfiction, this workshop-style course addresses the
issues of style, point of view, narrative and dramatic coherence as it applies to personal essay, the treatment of memory data,
the use of detail in scene-setting and the connection between fictional and poetic strategies in nonfiction writing. In
addition to their own work, students read and analyze contemporary creative nonfiction and classics in the genre; these texts
serve as models for students to help them locate themselves within the large framework of creative nonfiction. Students will
write several major pieces of varying lengths and types. As a workshop, this course can be taken twice for credit.

END

MAWR 02520:

Writing the Novel

Writing the Novel teaches students the structure, technique, and apparatus of the literary novel, and provides feedback
and guidance through extensive instructor critique and workshop-style evaluation. It is recommended that students
enrolling in this course have some prior practice in literary novel-writing or at least a strong background in reading the
literary novel. Students are required to submit four consecutive novel chapters with synopsis by the end of the course.

END

MAWR 02521:

Writing and Publishing the Nonfiction Book

Writing and Publishing the Nonfiction book is about the culture and commerce of publishing, as well as the process of
writing a nonfiction book. Students finish a proposal for a nonfiction book by the end of this semester and submit it to a
commercial publisher. They receive guidance and criticism from the instructor throughout the entire process, submitting
and re-submitting the proposals and sample chapters several times during the semester. In addition, students analyze book
markets, prepare detailed proposals for their book idea, and present their idea to a mock editiorial board making decisions
about the publishing promise of the book. During lecture, students develop a clear understanding of the symbiotic
relationships among ideas, authors, agents, publishers, and the buying public.

END

MAWR 02522:

Nonfiction Workshop

The Nonfiction Workshop provides an in-depth examination of nonfiction genres, including news reporting, features,
opinion, immersion journalism, biography, criticism, and social commentary and analysis. Lectures cover the methods,
techniques, and ethics of nonfiction. Various nonfiction markets and market requirements are discussed. Students read
model selections in various nonfiction genres and experiment with writing their own similar selections, which are discussed
and critiqued. Students complete substantial published articles and/or book selections in their chosen nonfiction genres. As
a workshop, this course can be taken twice for credit.

END

MAWR 02523:

Writing the Memoir

Students receive in-depth instruction in writing the memoir, one of the most engaging and popular literary forms today.
Students will read widely from selected memoirs, write three short memoirs that may stand alone or be interrelated, and
experience the workshop method of critiquing manuscripts. Students will focus on characterization, conflict, point-of-view,
and other literary elements traditionally associated with the narrative form as they develop their memoirs.

END

MAWR 02524:

Writing the Graphic Novel: Theory and Practice

This course explores the graphic novel genre and its incarnations through readings, writings, and discussion. An original
script for a graphic short story or beginning of a novel will be developed in a series of assignments, and discussed and
critiqued in a workshop environment. This course may not be offered annually.

END

MAWR 02525:

Writing Genre Fiction

Whether it involves walking through the woods speaking Elvish, visiting a distant planet, solving a crime, or staying the
night in a haunted house, genre writing captures audiences and transports them into the land of “what if.” In this class,
students will write long or short fiction in the genres of mystery, horror, fantasy, and sci-fi, exploring the conventions and
tropes each genre employs. Students will also study the ways in which published authors have used these genres to dig into
the human experience, and they will learn about the thriving publishing industry business that promotes these genres.

END

MAWR 03520:

Master of Arts in Writing Internship
.

Prerequisites: Approval of Graduate Advisor

Under professional supervision in the field, students put into practice theories and skills learned in the classroom.
Students' primary duties invlolve writing, though types and modes of writing (including electronic modes) may vary.
Internship experience totals 120 hours of work. Students maintain a detailed log of working hours, prepare a portfolio of
work completed in the internship, write an analysis of the internship experience and are evaluated by their site supervisor.

END

MAWR 07500:

The Essay: Art and Craft

This course introduces students to the essay as genre, its evolution, and current status. Emphasis is on esthetics, craft, and
technique. Students will engage in both analysis and essay writing as means toward achieving a theoretical understanding of
the form.

END

WA 01200:

Introduction to Writing Arts

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 and COMP 01112

Introduction to Writing Arts familiarizes students with the disciplinary underpinnings of Writing Arts, providing a
background in the history of writing, current writing theories, writing as technology, and the writing professions. The course
covers these issues within the context of the Writing Arts major, enabling students to situate themselves in a community of
writers and language professionals and preparing them for upper-level cousework.

END

WA 01201:

How Writers Read

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This sophomore-level course introduces students to theoretical methods of reading complex and sophisticated texts.
Students will study theories of reading and writing that concern structure, register, genre, intertextuality, and rhetorical
concerns. The course presents these theories and correlative methods through readings, and students then practice applying
these methods during class discussions and in writing using a series of self-selected texts as the objects of study.

END

WA 01300:

The Writer's Mind - WI

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

The Writer's Mind increases students' understanding of themselves as writers by learning craft-specific approaches to
writing, and by developing critical awareness of their own and others' writing. Working in different genres of writing,
students will gain experience in effective revision strategies, in analyzing audience, and in visual aspects of the printed or
electronic page.

END

WA 01301:

Writing, Research & Technology

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course presents the rhetorical, social, and practical dimensions of writing and researching in networked contexts.
Students analyze and compose with audio, video, image and text, using a variety of digital writing practices. Students blend
research methods informed by current literacy theories and modalities, allowing them to explore meaning-making,
circulation, and the ethical ramifications of writing within digital communities.

END

WA 01302:

Introduction to Technical Writing - WI

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01201 and 45 credits earned

This course introduces students to both the field of technical writing and the uses of technical writing within a variety of
professions. Students will learn how technical writers use document design strategies based on rhetorical principles to
respond to communication challenges. Through practice with a variety of genres, students will gain experience with
audience analysis, communication ethics, research, collaboration, professional style, and editing. The course culminates in a
writing project based on a professional, academic, or community issue of the student's choosing. Students are encouraged,
and will be assisted, in designing projects that reflect their professional interests.

END

WA 01304:

Writing Creative Nonfiction-WI

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and WA 07290

Addressing craft and ethical concerns, this course introduces students to creative nonfiction. In the study of this “fourth
genre” of creative writing, focus is on those elements, e.g., imagery, characterization, diction, that make nonfiction creative.
Students will write in a number of subgenres, such as memoir, literacy journalism, and the personal essay, and will be exposed
to a variety of narrative structures. They will also read and analyze representative professional writing to provide contexts
for their own work, which will be critiqued by both the instructor and their peers. Special attention will be paid to the
evolution of the student writer’s personal voice.

END

WA 01315:

Writing with Technologies

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and 60 earned credits

Writing with Technologies provides students with a theoretical basis for understanding the ways technologies - past,
present, and future - shape the collaborative construction of meaning inside and outside the classroom. Students are
encouraged to expand their repertoire of technologies and conduct research on contemporary writing practices to increase
critical awareness of the affordances and constraints writing technologies make available to them as future educators.

END

WA 01322:

Writing for the Workplace-WI

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course introduces students to writing activities common to most careers. Assignments may include resumes and cover
letters, field and progress reports, and proposals. Students can also expect to deliver brief oral presentations.

END

WA 01326:

Writing for Nonprofits-WI

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course is a junior level course that addresses the special technical and professional writing skills required for work in
the nonprofit sector. Students will develop a broad understanding of the unique communication challenges faced by
nonprofit organizations as they research and analyze the writing of various nonprofits and as they write in authentic
situations. This course explores how nonprofits communicate with their many audiences, and students will compose writing
typical of nonprofit organizations, including press releases and other public relations material, fundraising communications,
reports, and grant proposals. Students may also have the opportunity to engage in service learning by working with and for a
local area nonprofit.

END

WA 01350:

Rhetorics of Style-WI

Prerequisites: COMP 01112

This course introduces students to the theory and practice of writing with stylistic devices and strategies. Through
studying, analyzing, experimenting, and writing with a range of stylistic devices, students will develop a practical
understanding of how to put figural language to use for persuasive, expository, and aesthetic ends, as well as develop an
appreciation for the ethical implications of stylistic choices.

END

WA 01358:

Teaching the Writer's Workshop-WI

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112

In this course, students will explore current theories of the Writer's Workshop, and will develop the skills and knowledge
necessary to facilitate a successful Writer's Workshop within early childhood, elementary, and middle school settings.

END

WA 01370:

Professions in Writing Arts: Post-Graduate Options

Prerequisites: WA 01200 and 30 credits earned

Professions in Writing Arts: Post-Graduate Options introduces students to the various and wide-ranging opportunities
available to writing arts students by exploring career, graduate school and other professional options in the field of writing.
Class topics may include statements of purpose and letters of application; internships, field experience, and volunteerism;
and publishing opportunities. Professionalism and entrepreneurial approaches to job seeking are also emphasized.
Discussions and workshops are supplemented by guest speakers and readings.

END

WA 01408:

Writing as Managers

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 or HONR 01112 or ENGR 01102

This course provides Management students with extensive practice in preparing the written materials required by common
management activities. Assignments include preparing the written materials required for OSHA compliance, in disciplinary
situations, in alleged sexual harassment situations, and customer service. Other specific topical assignments will be
developed to respond to changes in the education needed by Management students.

END

WA 01415:

Situating Writing

Prerequisites: COMP 01112 and 75 credits earned

Situating Writing provides students with the theoretical and practical tools they will need to work with young writers by
introducing methods of teaching and evaluating writing that are explicitly writer-centered. Students will develop their own
understandings of the process while learning how to respond to writing in ways that are situation-specific. Students will also
improve their own writing by collaborating with other writers, giving and receiving feedback on work in progress, and using
a range of technologies that facilitate feedback and revision.

END

WA 01450:

Writing Arts Portfolio Seminar

Prerequisites: WA 01300 and WA 01301 and WA 01445

Seniors majoring in Writing Arts will have an opportunity to reflect on the work undertaken as part of the writing arts
major. The course asks students to construct and submit a portfolio consisting of work products both from those courses
included in the core and from a selection of courses in the required elective clusters. A written reflection on the intellectual
and learning experience derived from these courses as evidenced by the items included comprises the written requirement
for this course.

END

WA 07290:

Creative Writing I

Prerequisites: COMP 01111 or COMP 01105

This course concentrates on developing students' skills in writing various kinds of poems and in developing fiction
techniques. In addition to exploring different poetic forms, students learn how to create characters, establish conflict, and
develop a plot while writing a short story. Students examine the work of professional poets and fiction writers.

END

WA 07291:

Creative Writing II

Prerequisites: WA 07290 or CRWR 07290

Building upon the foundations learned in Creative Writing I, students in Creative Writing II will engage in more specific
practice in the conventions of short story writing, creative nonfiction and poetry. Students will have directed assignments
encouraging experimentation in multiple genres but will prepare a final portfolio that may give more emphasis to a genre of
their choice. Special emphasis will be placed on reading examples of these conventions and learning how writers graft or
borrow techniques (dialogue, dramatic monologue, voice, description) from one genre to apply it in another.

END

WA 07309:

Writing Children's Stories

Prerequisites: 30 credits earned

This course focuses on fiction written for juveniles and young adults. Students examine the rich variety of literature
published for young people. They do exercises, write complete stories, critique each other's writing in workshops and meet
with the teacher for individual conferences on their work. They also learn how to submit manuscripts to magazine and book
publishers.

END

WA 07391:

Writing Fiction

Prerequisites: WA 07290 or WA 07291 or CRWR 07290 or CRWR 07291

This class will provide a forum for students to explore the strategies fiction writers use in creative expression, especially in
writing the short story. Students will develop an analytical vocabulary that allows them to read, interpret, and evaluate the
work of other fiction writers. A major portion of the class will be given over to workshop sessions, where students can share
and evaluate each other's work. Students will also become familiar with a body of published short stories that illustrate
techniques of expression such as setting, point of view, characterization, dialogue, and other elements of fiction.

END

WA 07392:

Fundamentals of Playwriting

This course covers the methods of developing and writing a play. During the course, students analyze plays, and outline and
work on the draft of a full-length play. This course may not be offered annually.

END

WA 07395:

Writing Poetry

Prerequisites: WA 07290 or CRWR 07290

This class will provide a forum for students to explore the strategies poets use in creative expression. The students will
develop an analytical vocabulary that allows them to read, interpret, and evaluate the work of other poets. A major portion
of the class will be given over to workshop sessions, where students can share and evaluate each other's work. Students will
also become familiar with a body of published poetry that illustrates techniques of expression such as imagery, metaphor,
voice, tone, the music and strategy of the line, and other elements of poetry.